

The Soviet Union and World Problems
Harris Foundation Lectures – 1935.
It has become less and less difficult, hardly even embarrassing, as the course of the Stalinist regime in the Soviet Union has become clear to the enlightened bourgeoisie, for university round-table discussions to be devoted to the Soviet Union. We can guarantee that no professor, no gentleman of the professional or business world need fear the ruffling of his feelings by any crudeness in touch or approach to this delicate problem on the part of such understanding and sympathetic interpreters as Ambassador Troyanovsky, Chairman Boyeff, Correspondent Romm and Professors Kuhn and Graham. Unlike jewellers who polish off the rough edges and facets of a diamond to bring out its fire and lustre, these disseminators of culture use their technique to dim the intensity and brilliance of the October Revolution. The greatest world problem today is the problem of the transformation of capitalism into socialism, the problem of the international proletarian revolution and the relation of the Soviet Union to the world proletariat. In the perfunctory factual reports strung together in this book, not a hint is given that such a problem exists or that there is still a class struggle being waged. Rather the entire emphasis is laid on the juridical aspects of things, on the Stalin-Litvinov foreign policy, and on the question of nationalities in the Soviet Union.
The basic “principles” of the diplomacy of Stalin are stated with becoming clarity. The “struggle for peace”, that is, for the. maintenance of the status quo, the entry into, the League of Nations, the Franco-Soviet pact are all traced to the theory of socialism in one country. The peaceful coexistence of a workers’ state and of the surrounding world of capitalist states was premised on this Utopian theory. Stalin felt compelled to adopt this anti-Marxian “principle” in order to maintain power. The bureaucracy, with its Bonapartist pinnacle, became the regulator not only of the internal relations between workers and peasants in the workers’ state, but also of the antagonism between the workers’ state and world imperialism. In the process of regulating this inevitable antagonism between two fundamentally opposed economic and social systems, Stalin met reaction half way by crushing those instruments and organs which tied the Soviet Union firmly to the world proletariat and hence to world revolution. To the world working class Stalin assigned only one role – the policing of the borders of Russia to defend the Soviet Union against attack. But fearing to trust the workers with even this role, Stalin turns to the “friendly” imperialists for mutual defense against the “unfriendly” ones. These facts are, of course, not stated in such precise, terms by the Troyanovskys and Romms, but are not difficult to gather even in their guarded versions. Troyanovsky, who was a member of the Central Executive Committee of the Mensheviks during the October Revolution, makes it a point here as elsewhere, to link up the present policies of the Stalinists with those of Kerensky and the Mensheviks. Stalin is the continuator of Lenin – and Kerensky!
The treatment of the problem of nationalities in the Soviet Union is the best part of the book. Not, however, in the sense of portraying the tremendous role of national revolutions as one main stream flowing into and merging with the October Revolution, but as an indication of the completely democratic foundations of the Soviets and their freedom from the bourgeois taint of colonial exploitation. Nowhere was national oppression so intense, so bitter as under the Great Russian ruling class of the Czarist period. This was due to the backwardness of Russia and to the meagerness of the peasant economic foundation for the greedy exploitation by the feudal nobility and the landowners. It was the great contribution of Lenin to the strategy of revolution to have realized that the only way for the workers to gain the complete confidence of the oppressed nations was by the incorporation in the Bolshevik program of the complete self-determination of each nationality, even to the point of separating from Russia, the oppressor nation. It was this policy of the Soviets that actually kept the two hundred or more nationalities of Russia together in a federated socialist republic, pursuing the same socialist aims under different national forms. From the address of Stalin on the national question, reproduced in the appendix, one would hardly gather that Stalin the Georgian had endorsed the Menshevik point of view on this question just before October – a view which played the game of the Great Russian bourgeoisie in their attempt to keep in their clutches the exploited nations. The cultivation of the feelings of national patriotism in Russia at the present time are merely the recrudescences of Stalin’s old point of view. The Stalinist bureaucracy, relying more and more on a privileged and consciously fostered section of the working class, a stratum that is being imbued with feelings of superiority to the great mass of toilers, menaces the entire Soviet system. It creates the forces and the milieu that can prove fatal to the very existence of the workers’ state. It is to be expected, therefore, that Stalinism cannot help but have a corroding influence on the relation between the Soviets and the nations forming part of the Union. The danger of the restoration of capitalism inherent in the Bonapartist regime, includes the danger of the restoration of national oppression. A workers’ state can allow the completest freedom for national cultural development. In an imperialist epoch, a restored bourgeois state would by its very nature reestablish national and colonial exploitation.
The Harris lectures will not help to an understanding of the present phases of the class struggle, in or out of the Soviet Union. They form part of a vast literature of Stalinist justification, which means Stalinist prevarication and perversions of truth. It is necessary to refute the false and poisonous views presented in such books.

  The outcome of modern war depends on the home front as much if not more than on the battle front. The availability of resources at the beginning of, and during a war, and the level of the technical productive forces are vital matters that enter into all the plans and preparations of the General Staffs. Thus one large section of the United States War Department has as its task the keeping of up-to-the-minute files of statistics and technical information on every raw material and commodity that enters into military use, either directly or indirectly. These Commodity Files show the annual needs of the country, both civilian and military, the sources of supply, the stocks on hand in warehouses and in factories, the possibilities for quick expansion of production, the available substitutes in case of shortage. Where certain materials necessitate importing from abroad, particularly from South America, the navy is assigned the duty in advance of keeping the sea lanes open to protect the ships delegated to carry these materials. The war office keeps a watchful eye on the stocks on hand so as not to be caught with a shortage of some strategic commodity on the outbreak of war. Naturally in carrying out this phase of its imperialism duties, the War Department is in close touch with the capitalists who control the supplies, with the trusts and combines. The news of the embargo on export of tin scrap is an indication of the mutual helpfulness of this intimate relationship. At the outbreak of war certain factories will be immediately mobilized according to prearranged plan to start production of military supplies. These strategic plants are naturally subsidized and given every assistance in time of peace. * * * Detinning and War Tin is not an essential or “strategic” commodity. It is more a convenience in modern life than a necessity. Substitutes could easily be found for tin in the food industries and in the manufacture of automobiles. It seems strange, at first sight, therefore, that Secretary of State Hull in his capacity as Secretary of the National Munitions Control Board, should have seen fit to endorse the protest of two detinning firms and place an embargo on export of scrap tin for three months, to be followed by licensing of such exports. The Vulcan Detinning Co., of Sewaren. N.J., and the Mutual and Thermit Co. of N.Y., the two major producers of tin from scrap, claim that the running of their business profitably is being threatened by Japan’s extraordinary purchases of scrap metal here. Therefore, in conformity with the War Department plan for mobilization of industry in time of war, Hull took quick action. Evidently the war department wishes to maintain these plants. But it would be quite incorrect to assume that the only reason is to assure a supply of tin for the war. That is a relatively minor purpose. The real motive must be sought in the process of detinning, in the chemicals formed during the process of recovering tin from scrap. This process uses chlorine in considerable quantities. Chlorine is one of the elements that enter into the production of certain of the poison gases. The tetrachloride of tin, one of the chemicals produced, is used in explosives to produce a concealing smoke, and is also used in producing glares. It is for these purposes that the war department is anxious to keep going these detinning plants, and not for the tin primarily. Of course tin enters into the making of all Babbitt bearings which are so essential to all machinery, particularly on ships and in mechanized warfare. But Bolivia is a source of tin that is under the direct control of the United States navy, a source that could not possibly be closed to American imperialism in wartime. No, it is poison gases and the materials for producing flares and concealing smokes that motivate Hull and Roosevelt. * * * Preparations for War Precisely because war involves the utmost need of technical preparation, the careful planning of the complete industrial life of the nation, it takes a number of years for a country to build up the stocks necessary and to see that the plant equipment is adequate. The United States today is engaged in these technical preparations, just as is every other power. The rivalries, the competition for markets and colonies, the need for expansion on the part of each national branch of capitalism, have reached the explosive point. The capitalist world is on a volcano ready to blow up and to destroy civilization. The workers of all countries will be the victims of imperialist war. Such wars have as their aim the bolstering-up of a decaying and tottering capitalism. The capitalists aim to maintain the system of exploitation of the working class at home by extending their field of operation to other lands and to other peoples. If workers once learn that such wars are aimed just as much at them as at the “enemy” abroad by the home capitalists, then all the technical preparations of the war mongers and their military, servants will come to nought. For in the final analysis, the primary and absolutely essential productive force is the man-power of the worker himself. The capitalists can conduct war only so long as they can successfully suppress the militant working class, only so long as the proletariat is forcibly prevented from taking the means of production out of the hands of the exploiters and into its own.   
  Of all the great powers Britain is today the most vulnerable, the one that has most to fear from the inevitable changes that an unstable capitalism will bring forth. The end of Great Britain’s world domination was foreshadowed even before the war, with the rise of those colossal industrial rivals, the United States and Germany. The World War and the changes wrought since have emphasized the processes of decay rotting the foundations of Empire – and simultaneously threatening the very existence of the capitalist system as a whole. Viewed from any criterion of imperialist power – the decline of its capital export, the loss of naval supremacy, the threat of the new weapons of warfare that shift England’s “boundaries” from the Channel to the Rhine, the economic development of the colonies with the creation of a colonial proletariat capable of leading the movement for independence, the internal economic crisis at home – Britannia feels the sceptre slipping from her grasp. Threatened in every direction and on every front, British imperialism is engaged in utilizing every means to stave off the evil day, to prolong its rule and with this rule the entire system of exploitation at home and colonial oppression abroad. Under these circumstances, it becomes the task and the duty of the class conscious workers to utilize every means to strengthen their forces and their organization, to unite the struggle of the British proletariat and the oppressed masses in the colonies so as to prepare to wrest power from their brutal imperialist masters. Otherwise the fragments of empire can only fall into the greedy hands of other imperialist powers, even more powerful than the present rulers and the masses now under the British whip will suffer new lashes from the new slave-drivers. * * * Radek and Conservation of the Empire Radek, playing the Stalinist game, proposes to advise the English bourgeoisie in their frantic efforts at self-preservation as a ruling class. This is the inevitable outcome of a policy which places sole reliance on imperialist combinations to maintain the status quo. To the Stalinist bureaucracy that status quo includes the one concern that lies nearest to their heart’s desire, the maintenance of their own uncontrolled power in the Soviet Union. If the British bourgeoisie feel keenly the threat to their power in any major disturbance of the present world relation of forces, the Stalinists are no less chilled to the marrow by the specter of future wars – and revolutions. Tremendous unleashed mass forces, even when aimed at capitalist overthrow, are not to the liking of men whose sole claim to power rests on the stifling of mass forces. Writing in Current History on Britain’s Way in World Politics, Radek bids the “wiser” conservatives in England to take the better of two courses in order to safeguard their system. At the present time the ruling section of the bourgeoisie is playing the game of balance of power once more. In order to preserve the empire intact, and yet allow for the expansion of a strangling Germany, the tories propose to tie Germany’s hands in the West and permit Hitler complete freedom in the East. Britain proposes to survive at the expense of the Soviet Union. This is a time-honored policy of “perfidious Albion,” – to make a deal with a possible aggressor at the expense of other powers. How does Radek propose to bring about a change of heart among the slave-drivers? By addressing himself to those “conservatives” who are shrewder and hope to preserve the status quo by means of “collective security” through the League of Nations. Radek warns that any breach of peace, despite any hope of the English that they can remain isolated and become the source of supplies for a warring Germany, can only result in a general world-wide war which would threaten the entire structure of the Empire. Far better for them to rely, in accordance with the sentiment of the British masses, on that preserver of peace, the League. And please note, my English friends, says Radek, if war should nevertheless break out, you would through this policy obtain the whole-hearted support of your masses. “But if war becomes inevitable owing to the imperialist policy of Japan, Germany and Italy (not France or Great Britain, of course!) then the British masses, as was shown by the trade union congress and the Labor Party, will be all for the defensive measures adopted by the League (!!). Particularly since the entry of the Soviet Union into the League, those masses see in the League a guarantee that defense against German, Italian and Japanese aggression will not degenerate into a policy of imperialist deals at the expense of other peoples.” In other words, Radek promises to cover British imperialism with the mantle of the Soviet Union if Britain will turn away from Germany. With the aid of Stalin, the masses will be led into thinking that defense of the empire is “defense of peace in general.”   
   Undeclared War in East The guerrilla warfare across the borders of Outer Mongolia between Japanese invaders and the Soviet Mongolia is the prelude of imperialist aggression against the Soviet Union. It is the beginning of an undeclared war. The Japanese are pressing on without let-up to the Siberian border. Inner Mongolia has already fallen prey to the inordinate appetite of the Eastern imperialists. The diplomatic term “incident” is not applicable to a situation in which scores of lorries filled with armed troops stage incursions reaching forty miles into “enemy” territory. This is what the Japanese army is doing – in preparation for the real drive, the great push that will commence the Second World War. Now as never before the workers of all lands must be made to realize that all their hopes for a better world, nay, that the preservation of civilization itself, depend on their successful defense of the Soviet Union against the murderous onslaught of world capitalism. The struggle of the workers for liberation from wage slavery is indissolubly bound up with the fate of the Russian Workers’ Republic. The fight to save the Soviet Union must be waged everywhere, on all fronts, against the system of capitalist exploitation. The enemies of the Soviet Union are the capitalists of all lands. The fight must be waged against them. Only by the revolutionary struggle for the overthrow of capitalism can the safety of the Soviets be assured. The nearer war approaches the greater becomes the urgency for organizing the forces of the proletariat against imperialist war. These forces, at present dispersed and leaderless, can be rallied for new victories only under the banner of the Fourth International. * * *  Eden Made Secretary Eden replaces Hoare as Secretary for Foreign Affairs – and nothing changes. Those who talk of the conservative ministry of Baldwin embarking on some new course are merely carrying out their function of deluding the masses. Baldwin’s cabinet, including Eden, have only one task under many forms, the defense of British imperialism. In the carrying out of this task Eden will use cleverly the worked-up sentiment for sanctions and the League of Nations. Already England is engaged in manipulating those pawns of the powers on the chessboard of politics, the Balkan states. These states form at the same time the key to the door of communications with the East and with Africa, and also the means of entry to the backdoors of the European states that may be occupied in warfare on the Western fronts. Eden’s first job is to consolidate a military bloc with Turkey, Greece, Rumania and Yugoslavia under the fake of “exploring” the bases of sanctions. Turkey will probably be allowed to refortify the Dardanelles. Thus with the help of the British Labor Party, which approves of sanctions, British imperialism is making complete war preparations. Sanctions and the League of Nations thus serve as a perfect cover, a protective coloration of “peace” hiding the feverish plans for war. Instead of denouncing the fraud being perpetrated on the masses, the leaders of the Labor Party again show their function of advocating the views of the bourgeoisie in the ranks of the working class and betraying the workers to the ruling class by supporting sanctions. In this period social-patriotism and sanctions become absolutely synonymous. * * *  Laval Shaky The Laval government, one that straddles the two major classes in modern society in the attempt to mediate between the two irreconcilables, the capitalists and the workers, has become extremely shaky. Its fall is predicted in a short time. The laws for the disarming of “armed leagues” have been made meaningless by the Senate, if one assumes that they could have had any real meaning even if passed in their, original form The Senate refuses to leave the matter of prosecution and punishment to the ordinary courts. It places the entire matter in the hands of the president and the cabinet. The armed bands are – if you please – to be disarmed and dissolved by decree, with no force to actually carry out the decrees. The farcical nature of the procedure in which the Socialists and Stalinists were led to participate by their eagerness for class-collaboration, stands nakedly revealed in this Senate proposal. Of course, nobody possessing an iota of political sanity could possibly have been led to believe that Lebrun or Laval would take any steps to disarm the forces held in reserve by their masters in case the workers become unmanageable. Far from attempting to disarm the Fascist bands, Laval will turn the attack on the workers and will do everything possible to aid his friend Colonel de la Rocque. Even if there were not direct evidence of the constant seances between Laval and de la Rocque, this course could be infallibly inferred by the most superficial study of the relations between the Bonapartist governments and the Fascist bands, in every country where Fascism has come to power. Without government aid, hidden at first, more or less open later, these bandits could never have grown and become powerful.   
   Neutrality for Sanctions Election year is here and the season is open for the creation of fake issues between capitalist politicians. More especially is this the case over the issue of war or peace. In this respect the present campaign bears certain resemblances with that of 1916 when Wilson was re-elected for having “kept America out of war.” Then too the “education” of the masses was accomplished by maintaining a fictitious appearance of neutrality in the first world war. How fictitious this issue was is clearly enough revealed in the memoirs of Secretary of State Lansing, despite the pose of “high moral tone” attempted by the careful selection of documents. Lansing replaced Bryan in order to steer the United States into the war on the side of the Allies. The fundamental reasons for aiding the allied imperialists were the financial interests of the American capitalists, particularly those of the big bankers. The most backward person knows this today so that there is absolutely nothing new being revealed by the Congressional investigation of the relation between the Morgan loans and the entry of America except for the filling out of a few concrete details. It was easy for the bankers to create the appearance of a financial crisis with the possibility of panic in order to achieve their aims of complete support of England and France. Diplomacy had the usual task of covering up these material interests with the more palatable veneer of “humanity and democracy”. Thus the immediate causes of war were made the submarine issue and the “freedom of the seas.” Lansing is careful in his memoirs to delete all documents which would reveal the direct influence of the Morgans in shaping American policy. Thus the letter of Lansing to Wilson in which the Secretary becomes the obvious mouthpiece of the financiers in securing direct government backing of the floating of enormous loans to the Allies, is omitted.   Neutrality Today The British tories found it to their advantage to screen their war preparations under the disguise of sanctions. The pose of international capitalist action against Italian imperialism made an appeal to English workers. Similarly the “liberal”and “progressive” henchmen of capitalism here wish to exploit the desire for peace of the masses by waging a fake battle over neutrality. To do this however they must make it appear that it was the nefarious work of the big bourgeoisie that caused the giving up of neutrality in the last war. It was the careful preparations and maneuvering of Morgan and Lamont behind the scenes that overthrew “neutrality”. And of course Nye and Borah intend to see to it that this does not happen again! As a matter of fact neutrality at this time is the method by which the American imperialists are accomplishing their aims with least expense. American capitalism dominates the world and its wishes must be carefully consulted by the other imperialists. Thus America influences all decisions without appearing to have any finger in the pie at all. This leaves the big bourgeoisie free to maneuver and to remain aloof until the proper moment arrives to intervene and exert their utmost power – when the rival imperialists are in no position to oppose the will of America. Just as Wilson proceeded during “neutrality” to construct the biggest navy afloat, so Roosevelt in the lull that precedes the next great conflict, is hastening the building of the strongest navy on the seas. Neutrality does not stop for one moment the complete militarizing of the Pacific in order to be ready for the need of neutrality and the opening of war with Japan. Neutrality here plays the same role that sanctions played and play in England. * * *  Vigilantes in Seattle The elements and methods of fascism are always present in capitalist society in embryo. It is when these sectional elements begin to recur, when they begin to coalesce and take on national character that fascism becomes immediately menacing to the working class. To gauge the progress of reaction so as to see ahead and organize the working class for defense against the rule of knife and club, it is necessary to pay close attention to every sectional struggle. The Pacific Coast has witnessed tremendous battles in the class struggle in the past few years. The general strike in Frisco stands out as a monument to solidarity. At the present time the indications are that the marine workers in whose cause the workers fought this major battle, may again strike against the big shipping interests. The bosses on their side are prepared to put down such a strike with the violence and brutality characteristic of major strike movements. A minor but important indication of ruling class preparedness is seen in the vigilante movement all along the Coast. Only a few days ago the vigilantes of Seattle raided a Communist school that had just been opened and attacked in vicious fashion students and teachers. The latter were chased for blocks and beaten with clubs. Here as everywhere in the capitalist world when gangster tactics are used against the working-class movement, the thugs were aided by the police. Before the arrival of the vigilantes several members of the teaching staff and student body had been arrested by the police under orders from the Mayor. Following the arrests the terror was loosed on the remaining individuals. This is but a symptom of what may be expected on a growing scale in the event of big strikes. It is necessary for the workers to made aware of the situation in advance and to organize their forces accordingly for the defense of their meetings against the vigilantes.   



[Beyond the Electoral Stage]
The defeat of the combined reactionary-monarchical-fascist forces in Spain, even though confined as yet to the parliamentary sphere, has sent a wave of joyous confidence and daring through the hearts of millions of toilers in town and country. The flames of proletarian and peasant revolt, all but extinguished under the onslaught of the bourgeoisie, have burst out anew and even more fiercely. The brutal repressions suffered by the workers after the defeat of the last insurrection have called forth a spontaneous outburst which carries the movement far beyond the electoral stage. For the moment the reactionary forces are being scattered like chaff before the wind. In the agrarian regions – Badajos, Cadiz, Salamanca, Caceras – the starving peasants have begun to seize the land, driving out the big landowners. Under the tremendous pressure developed in the new situation, the government has been forced to legalize this “distribution” of land temporarily, “pending passage of necessary laws by the Cortes.” A revolutionary situation exists. But equally clearly, all the dangers that threatened to engulf the Spanish proletariat previously and give the victory to the counter-revolution, remain.
* * *

The “People’s Front”
The People’s Front by means of which the proletariat was completely subordinated to the “democratic” bourgeoisie, is already breaking up into its irreconcilably antagonistic elements, the moment the workers resort quite spontaneously to independent action in their own interests. The petty bourgeoisie have taken immediate alarm at the uncontrollable power shown by the masses. Azana, republican mainstay of the bourgeoisie, has been extended credit anew among the masses by the betraying People’s Front of Republicans-Socialists-Stalinists, in order to derail the workers’ revolution for the second time. With the reported consent of Caballero, so-called left socialist, Azana has prohibited all demonstrations. The order was applied in particular against Socialist farm laborers who had planned to hold monster demonstrations in Madrid and all provincial capitals in favor of immediate parcelling of grandees’ estates. It remains to be seen whether Azana will succeed in “normalizing” the situation. Meantime, as is always the case with the “liberal” bourgeois elements boosted into power with the aid of the masses, Azana is already making overtures to the reactionaries to whom he feels infinitely closer than to the proletariat. Azana was placed in power to prevent Gil Robles from attaining control. But just as Hindenburg invited Hitler to take over the reins of government, so there are already negotiations between Azana and Gil Robles on the possibility of a parliamentary bloc against the “left”. At the same time Azana kindly “advises” young Primo de Rivera, fascist leader, to leave the country until things blow over. The denouement of the People’s Front threatens to be a very speedy one indeed – at the expense of the workers!
* * *
The working class of Spain is today celebrating a great electoral “victory.” That “victory” leaves the bourgeoisie in power. True, that section of the bourgeoisie in power prefers the republic to the monarchy. But the character of the regime is determined finally by the nature of the class holding power, in this case the propertied class. Once before it was the power of the ballot, to all appearances, that brought about the downfall of the monarchy in favor of the republic. It was the continued faith in that (bourgeois) republic under the self-same Azana, that led to the previous defeat of the proletarian revolution. It was the fact that no revolutionary party existed, basing itself on a Marxist program, capable of planning the revolution carefully, step by step, able to assist the masses in assimilating their experiences, that held back the revolution. Spontaneous action of the masses, without a clear plan and a firm program and without the leadership of a party, can only lead to defeat, however courageous the struggle of the workers.
In every country where the blight of the capitalist crisis has finally resulted in a revolutionary crisis, it has been demonstrated that a vanguard party of the most class conscious and militant workers is a prerequisite for a successful struggle against the capitalists. Will a second demonstration of this Marxist principle be necessary for the Spanish working class? The Stalinists, by their class collaborationist policy of the People’s Front, have again brought the Spanish workers to the brink of defeat. The militant socialist workers have been hampered from reaching firm Marxist ground as the only logical result of their own experiences, by the false and betraying course of Stalinism. Correct leadership can only be built on the clear plans and the firm principles of the New International.
 

   Relief – for Big Business The process of whittling away relief for the unemployed by alphabetical strategy is carried a long step forward in Roosevelt’s latest message to Congress on the budget. This is election year and Roosevelt intends to leave nothing undone in order to corral the support of business. Economy and the avoidance of taxation on business are the forms of relief proposed by the “humanitarian” President – for big business! The real purpose of the WPA is being rapidly unfolded. That purpose was to provide a clever intermediary to get workers off the relief rolls and then, after a short space of time, to lay them off and prevent them from getting back on the relief rolls. Each month a new batch of unemployed will be “laid off” to fend for themselves in this best of all possible worlds. Hopkins has given public assurance to the capitalist class by laying out a definite schedule of cuts in the WPA rolls. Of course Hopkins “hopes” that the needy will get back on relief. Or perhaps they will be shuttled from the WPA to the PWA! No doubt some shifts like this will raise false hopes in the minds of many unemployed that it is only a matter of waiting a short time for renewed work on federal payrolls. But the big majority will be doomed to bitter disillusion. Roosevelt is making it plain that after the elections – a little relief is still necessary for voters! – the Federal Government will wash its hands of the largest burdens of relief. On one condition! That the unemployed remain passive and put up only a scattered fight against the outright starvation being planned for them. * * *  Division of Labor In the division of labor for carrying out the demands of the capitalist class. Roosevelt occupies the position of the liberal demagogue “voicing” the interests of the masses. Thus he points to the NRA as the would-have-been solution of the problem of unemployment – if that other arm of capitalism, the Supreme Court, had not declared it unconstitutional. He is left to appeal to the voluntary action of the employers to “extend their operations so as to absorb an increasing number of the unemployed.” And since this will not do if left to individual bosses, he calls for organised effort on a national scale. As though it was not the “voluntary” action of the bosses in the first place that had produced unemployment as the inevitable concomitant of the business crisis! Roosevelt suggests a campaign on the part of big business for shorter hours to provide more jobs. This demagogy at a time when the average work week has grown three hours longer (from July to December 1935)! The A.F. of L. calculates that this increase in the work week resulted in the loss of a million jobs to the unemployed. The only difference between Roosevelt and the more reactionary members of the capitalist governing staff is that Roosevelt wishes to act more cautiously and not as bluntly and speedily in letting down the unemployed from their present miserable status to one that is still worse. It will be the function of Congress to start investigations of the undoubted political corruption that exists in the WPA (as in capitalist institutions in general) to force a quicker end to the system of work relief. Already this pressure is on due to the exposure of conditions in West Virginia. The attitude of Congress is shown by its refusal to continue the Florida and “Quoddy” ship canals by the grant of special fund. No doubt there will be some opposition to the measly sum of one and one half billion dollars asked for by Roosevelt, although it is unlikely that this will be refused. The CCC camps are also due for a liberal application of the axe. One hundred thousand youths are to be discharged from these camps by July 1st. * * *  Unity of the Unemployed It is no accident, under these circumstances, that the movement of the unemployed is taking on a new impetus. Objective conditions are forcing the unemployed workers to organize and to seek unity of effort to combat the plans of the capitalist class directed against their very existence. These workers note that in the past 6 months the profits of big corporations have gone up more than 140%. They note that in the “bull” stock market there has been a gain of 55% in stock quotations. They see that with some considerable recovery of business the re-employment of unemployed workers has made only a small dent in their ranks, continually augmented by the new generation of young workers ready and eager to earn a living. There are still some ten and one half million out of work, by conservative estimate. The capitalists make it difficult to obtain complete and reliable statistics on this question. These workers thrown out of industry in the crisis must struggle for their very lives against the Roosevelt plan to slowly put an end to all relief to the “employables.” Roosevelt and his masters are reckoning without the mass pressure that will be exerted by employed and unemployed alike to stave off starvation for millions of workers. For this gigantic struggle a firmly knit mass organization is essential. This organization is in the making in the promising efforts for unity of the unemployed movements, particularly the NHL and the WAA. Out of this unity will spring a stronger and more powerful organizing force for the coming battles.   


In the modern era of finance-capitalism, or imperialism, peace among the nations is merely a truce between wars. The truce is utilized by the future combatants to polish up and perfect the weapons of speedy death whilst eyeing the “enemy” from head to foot. The armed truce since the first World War is drawing rapidly to a close, the second world war looms darkly just ahead.
The first World War was preceded by the race for armaments, disguised half-heartedly now and again by “standstill” agreements that halted nothing. The stage is being set in exactly similar fashion for the Second World War: disarmament conferences that lead to ever greater piling-up of guns and munitions; mounting national budgets for armies and navies. Yesterday it was Japan with the largest military budget of its history. Today it is the United States with its three hundred million dollars for the navy alone. Secretary
Adams, in requesting this melon for the militarists, gives an account of the relative naval standing of the enemies, England, Japan and the United States; personnel, number of battleships, cruisers, destroyers, aircraft carriers, submarines. It was Lenin in his Imperialism who remarked:
“There can be no other conceivable basis, under capitalism, for the sharing out of spheres of influence, of interests, of colonies, etc., than a calculation of the strength of the participants, their general economic, financial, military strength, etc.”
 
Japan Reaches for North China
Not by accident is it that a decade nfter the first world war, which gave such a tremendous impetus to the development of her monopoly finance-capitalism, Japan reaches out for North China. Like German capitalism before the War, Japanese imperialists fear being left out in the cold in the exploitation of the rich earth through possession of colonies. Since in this century the world has been completely shared out, the Japanese can only come into possession of new territory by seizing it from some other possessor, in this case the Chinese. The Japs have coveted the Manchurian provinces since the Russo-Jap War. They viewed with alarm and increasing dismay the influx of Chinese immigrants that began in 1911 and reached such tremendous proportions in 1926. This, in conjunction with a shrewd gauging of the “opportune” moment from the point of view of the international situation, decided the Japanese generals to act before it became too late.
But this present action was prepared years before by the Katos and Tanakas with their Big Army and Navy programs which took definite shape about 1920. At that time the nationalist, imperialist Kobe journal, the Japan Chronicle, wrote:
“The great Navy is to be built solely that Japan may be able to do things on the Asiatic mainland and present them to the world as accomplished facts without running the risk of the Powers offering ‘advice’ such as they offered in 1895 regarding Liaotung. The expansion of the Navy is not for the purpose of being aggressive but for the purpose of deterring protest if aggressive action should for any reason be committed.”
This paper adds:
“Japan today is the third naval power in the world. She is, perhaps, the second military power. In combined naval and military force she is second to none. It is impossible to attain such a position in the world without being regarded with a certain amount of awe and apprehension.”
 
American Apprehensions
The apprehension of their American business rivals has indeed been aroused. Hence, the U.S. government gives tacit encouragement to American citizens not to buy Japanese silks, Mrs. Hoover ostentatiously takes to wearing cotton gowns, American merchants call in their credits from Japan, American banks refrain from granting loans to Japanese applicants, etc. Is it a shrewd guess to interpret the flurry in the Japanese stock market recently as the dumping of Japanese stocks and bonds by American holders? But these measures are not the major ones. The main steps are pressure applied through American influence and power in Europe, and – transfer for an indefinite period of the American navy to the Pacific.
The Balkanization of Manchuria goes on apace nevertheless, with Japan throwing its armies into Jehol. The League promulgates a verbose document of inanities whose meaning, as given by the diplomats themselves, amounts to informing China that she has the League’s permission to fight back the Japanese invasion. But Japan is insured how to taking “advice” from the League on Manchuria. Her big navy is proof against such “advice”!
 



The hypocrisy of the imperialist League of Nations in its attitude towards China stands recorded in every speech of the “statesmen”. The League was founded for the maintenance of a robbers’ status quo and for the crushing of the Soviet Union, these two aims going necessarily hand in hand. It is worth recalling for a moment the historic antecedents of the present League.
Its prototype was the Holy Alliance initiated by Czar Alexander. The clearest expression of that alliance was given in the Protocol of Troppau in 1820. The advance of “democracy” had not yet made mandatory care in the wording of documents. That protocol stated, “If owing to such (revolutions), immediate danger threatens other states, the Powers bind themselves by peaceful means, or if need be by arms, to bring back the guilty state to the bosom of the Great Alliance.” With the necessary modification due to the march of history, this is still the doctrine of the League. It must be recalled further that the first Hague Peace Conference was initiated by another Czar, Nicholas II, in 1898; that finally, the League was constituted by the most reactionary imperialist diplomats after a robbers’ world war. China is still in the throes of revolution, halted but for a moment. The League and the Japanese call this intense and profound movement of the Chinese masses that is forcing the submerged workers and peasants on to the stage of history, nothing but “chaos” and “anarchy”. In reality this places China outside the pale of the League. And that is the complete tenor of Matsuoka’s speech of withdrawal from the League. That speech is the declaration, if it still needed any declaration, that it is “open season” for the robber imperialists in China. “That (lack of unity) is one reason why China – is unable to defend itself today, unable to rid itself as it desires, of foreign military forces stationed in and about the treaty ports and of foreign vessels that ply the Yangtse Kiver. These forces are not only Japanese. They are British, American, French, Italian and others ... Less than five years ago a portion of these forces, British and American, had to go into action at Nanking.” In short, says Japan, let us make no bones about the matter, we are doing precisely what you would like to do, but we are doing it first.
The attitude of British capitalism at this juncture is superbly stated by Winston Churchill who tells America that she will have to pull her own chestnuts out of the fire. “Even if foreign countries engaged in a war there is no reason why a wise, honorable foreign policy should not enable us to stand aside.” That is to say let the U.S. and Japan ruin each other while we keep the arena from becoming a free-for-all. Churchill goes on, after stating that the League cannot force England into a war: “The first duty of British statesmen is to make sure we are not drawn into any war, and it is only their second (!) duty to try to prevent others from fighting of to try to end their quarrels ... We do not want to throw away our old friendship with Japan.” Churchill tells Japan plainly that she has a perfectly free hand in China so far as England is concerned. In fact he compares directly what Japan is doing in China with what England herself is engaged in carrying out in India. And indeed the comparison is most apt!
Meantime the League begins a new tune on the arms embargo. Such an embargo would hardly be worth the paper to record it. No government that wished to do so (and the munitions makers of all countries are most eager to get going) would be prevented from winking at slight “irregularities” that meant good business. Right now both England and France are supplying munitions to Japan at top speed. Nor do or will the American Guggenheims hesitate for one moment in shipping vast quantities of nitrates from Chile – enough for a prolonged war with America if that war breaks out. An arms embargo would be merely another scrap of paper.
Opinions have been freely expressed that Japan will shortly find herself in dire financial straits. This is not true in the immediate, naive sense stated. So long as France has vast hoards of unused gold, Japan will secure all the financing it needs from the great money-lender of Europe. Particularly is this true because France fears as much as does Japan the unification of China which would mean the ultimate ousting of the reactionary French from Annam and South China. The rub will come for Japan when the debts fall due, when its internal shakiness becomes accentuated by desperate efforts at more intense exploitation of its workers and peasants. The cost of living rises to stupendous heights in Japan while real wages fall. The strict Japanese censorship screens out the news of peasant riots and workers’ strikes that are surface indications of the seething below. In the end it is the inescapable internal contradictions of Japanese economy that spell the doom of her imperialism.
 



The Japanese generals refuse to be checked by the League of Nations. The goal of their ambitions for many a long time, is too close to their grasp to allow it to be snatched away again. Far from giving up Manchuria, the Japanese imperialists plan to extend their conquest and “legalize it by employing the mercenary Manchu tool, Henry Pu Yi, former boy emperor of China. He will make a bid for the throne of North China at Peiping, the Japs supplying the necessary bayonets. Let the League fulminate, let the U.S. intrigue – it is now or never for the bandits of the Far East.
The Imperial Diet at Tokio has given its blessing to the patriotic undertaking “defending” Japan by conquering China. The largest budget in Japanese history, two and a quarter billion yen, has been approved in order to finance another year of aggression in Asia. Direct allotments of 33 percent of this swollen sum are made to the army and navy. The fact that this sum of money cannot be collected in taxation and therefore that the fiscal policy means inevitably greater inflation of the currency than has already occurred, does not disturb the ruling class. For the devastating effects of such inflation will be shifted on to the backs of the workers and peasants. Financing the war in China can be accomplished only by intensifying exploitation at home.
If the capitalists have any misgivings as to the ultimate outcome of a break with Europe and America, they will have to keep mum for the present – the generals are in the saddle. Nevertheless the Tokio stock market registers the fears of the less blood-thirsty section of finance imperialism. Stocks and bonds have tumbled, revealing the Achilles heel of Japanese economy, the lack of adequate finances, one of the first blows to be delivered by the League and the U.S. at Japan, if the imminent break actually occurs, will be the clamping down on loans. It remains to be seen, even then, whether France will abide by such a decision.
The Japanese threaten to shut the door of Manchurian trade to the rest of the world if further pressure for their withdrawal is applied. The imperialist powers have had too much experience with their own method of handling conquered territory, for them to waste any feeling over this threat. Manchuria has been closed to all but Japan since its occupation. American business has reconciled itself to this fact and has turned to the Yangtze Valley for its future Chinese market.
Meanwhile the U.S. government, the political committee of American finance capital, does not sit twiddling its thumbs. It is utilizing the debt tangle to the utmost as may be witnessed by the activities of the League, and particularly of England. It is intriguing with its dollars in China, goading the treacherous Kuo Min Tang on to some semblance of resistance to further Japanese encroachment.
By the irony of history, it may come about that the League of Nations, which at its very inception sent invading armies into Soviet Russia to help suppress the revolution, will be split asunder by its own internal imperialist contradictions before accomplishing its major objective, the isolation and suppression of the Soviets. It seems almost fantastic that the U.S. should grant recognition to the Soviet Union because of “common interests” against Japan. And yet this is taking place before our eyes. That this recognition should result, as Radek planned, in an alliance against Japan of the most reactionary and the most advanced countries, that is, however, still unthinkable. Not so long as the Soviets still represent the dictatorship of the proletariat. The Scott Nearings who predict such an event, are merely predicting without realizing it, the downfall of the dictatorship of the proletariat.
 



(Continued from last issue)
It is a far cry from the peaceful, agitational phase of the Japanese labor movement at the time of the Russo-Japanese War to the necessarily stern and virile movement of the present time. At that time the Japanese Social Democrats wrote their famous greetings to the Russian comrades despite the reality of the imperialist war into which both governments had plunged the two nations. The Japanese workers, struggling against nationalist jingoism and capitalist imperialism, understood clearly the international aspect of their movement. Yet they had not advanced beyond the stage where they could say:
“We are neither nihilists nor terrorists, but we are Social Democrats. We object absolutely to using military force in our fighting. We have to fight by peaceful means, by reason and speech.”
Lenin replied to these historic greetings in Iskra and his words stand out today, the day of open violence and organized terror against the Japanese workers, in startling boldness and with striking applicability:
“Amid the jingoistic chorus of both countries, their voice sounds as a herald from that better world, which, though it exists today only in the mind of the class-conscious proletariat, will become a reality tomorrow We do not know when that ‘tomorrow’ will come. But we, the Social Democrats the world over, are all working to bring it nearer and nearer. We are digging a grave for the miserable today – the present social order. We are organizing the forces which will finally bury it. Force against force, violence against violence! And in saying this we speak neither as nihilists nor as terrorists ... What is important for us is the feeling of solidarity, which the Japanese comrades have expressed in their message to us. We send them a hearty greeting. Down with militarism! Hail to the international social democracy!”
 
The Epoch of Wars and Revolutions
Ours is a stormy epoch, an epoch of profound upheavals. Capitalist civilization, its contradictions laid bare before the entire world, its component parts warring against each other, is bankrupt and threatens chaos unless the vanguard of the workers leads the proletariat alone the only road out. But leadership is not a mechanical process, it is dynamic and creative and, after clear-sighted analysis of each situation, it must carefully choose the proper weapons for the struggle.
 
The Great Obstacle
The vanguard must know above all how to unite and rally the workers for the march to power. This road remains blocked and impassable so long as the majority of the working class remain under the deadening influence of the reformists and opportunists. Mere denouncing of these misleaders as social Fascists, not only does not accomplish anything, but tends to alienate the masses still under the yoke of the reformists. Surely the Japanese Communists, the vanguard of a movement that has from the first shown itself sensitive to the bitter lessons of the international proletariat, have learned from the experience in China with Chiang Kai-Shek, the need for a separate, unified Communist party. But surely also they have learned from a study of the German situation for the past several years, the danger of alienating themselves from the masses, the aid given to the reformist leaders by the Stalinist blunders in united front tactics. In Japan the acuteness of the crisis, the crushing of workers and peasants under the heels of the imperialists, offers an unexampled opportunity to unite the workers in struggle. As in every country, the immediate demands must be for relief for the unemployed and the starving, then the workers must be rallied together to demand unemployment insurance. But particularly in Japan, the struggle for bread can be linked directly with the struggle for peace, against militarism. The workers and peasants starve while the government wastes huge sums to maintain an army of conquest. Remember the rice riots!
 
Special Tasks of the Japanese Party
The Japanese face the task, as in no other country, of liberating women through organization, first in unions, then in the Party. Young girls and women form the majority of factory workers, the overwhelming majority of textile workers, Japanese women, like all women of the East, have been kept in virtual slavery in the home as well as in the shops and factories. Theirs has been the duty of unquestioning obedience. It is of utmost significance that divorces in Japan are three times as great in number as in America, the
classic land of divorce. The reason for this is the wretched position of the woman in the home. Signs are not lacking that the working women of Japan are learning to throw in their lot with that of the organized workers. But organization of women kept in dormitories is necessarily difficult. All unions can surely be united in the fight against this vicious system which has actually been utilized on occasion to starve women into subjection where they have had the courage to strike.
 
The Eta
The second special task of the Communists is to secure the cooperation of the outcaste Etas of Japan. The three million or so Etas have an organization of their own, the Suiheisha or Equality Society. This society with its 200,000 members played an important role in organizing the first labor party. The Etas, rough toilers, not afraid of violence, took a most active part in the rice riots of 1918. They live in separate villages generally shunned by the forces of law and order. The Communists must see to it that these sturdy outcasts are not misled into dissipating their energy entirely in a fight for social equality, important as such a fight is. The Etas are inevitably part of the working class and must be taught the importance of struggling for the interests of the entire working class. At the same time the other workers must prove their willingness to accept the Etas into their organizations on an equal footing.
 
The Army
Conscription makes of the Japanese army essentially a peasant army with a peasant psychology. The army is at the same time the strength and the weakness of Japanese imperialism. The peasants are not suddenly metamorphosed in the army; they remain the potential rebellion. They cannot help but wonder at the contrast between the misery and starvation in the homes they have just left, and the care taken of their health and “welfare” in the army. As cannon-fodder they are evidently worth far more than as toilers on the land.
The army is the armed peasantry and workers. It is in this sense that Communists must propagandize the army, bringing home the meaning of the contrasts between civilian and military life, showing that the starvation at home is the direct result of the use of the army abroad. The Chinese comrades have in this respect a duty whose fulfillment may prove decisive. They must aid their Japanese comrades to spread Communist propaganda among the troops. It may well be that if the next phase of the Chinese revolution, resulting from the Japanese aggression, once more brings the Chinese proletariat in the arena of struggle. The red heat of the Chinese revolution will communicate its intensity to the Japanese army.
The soldier workers and peasants must be fore-warned particularly against their use as tools to set up a Bonapart to stave off the revolution. The military clan in Japan, the dictators to both the Emperor and the Shadow government ever’ since the Restoration, is ready to proclaim army rule at a moment’s notice. The generals are not lacking in Bonapartist aspirations. The Machiavellian role of the military clique in keeping workers and peasants under the heavy yoke of exploitation by using a special (armed) part of the working class and peasantry, must be emphasized in soldier propaganda. Not Fascism is the danger in Japan but Bonapartism (military “mediation” between the classes) due to the special historic status of the generals. Bourgeois democracy has never been established in reality and hence need not be swept aside.
 
The Permanent Revolution
It is unthinkable that the present crisis in Japan can pass without profound changes. It is the extreme instability of Japanese economy that forces the army into Manchuria in search of desperate remedies. The war of conquest threatens to precipitate world war at any moment, on the one hand with the U.S., on the other with the USSR. To the revolutionist, it is utterly out of the question to think of helping to precipitate an imperialist war (between the U.S. and Japan) in order to avoid an attack on the Soviet Union, as has been in the minds of some. Just as inconceivable is it to think of any alliance between the U.S. and the USSR against Japan. Imperialism must be fought on all fronts, more especially on the home front. And if war nevertheless results, the Japanese workers long ago set an example of solidarity for all the world (of workers) to follow.
The revolutionary way out is only through the proletarian revolution. In Japan the situation is a rapidly-changing one. Under mass pressure, the capitalists, to save their own skins, may attempt to lead the workers and peasants against the militarists. The Communist must know in advance how to act in such an eventuality. If the capitalists are permitted to place themselves undisputedly at the head of the peasants, the revolution is doomed to failure. The Communists at the head of the proletariat must teach the peasants to carry out in actuality their real demands – to seize the land, to refuse to pay rents, to repudiate debts – and thus assure the “democratic” phase of the revolution. But the proletariat must not stop there, it must, with the aid of the poor, overburdened petty bourgeoisie, establish the dictatorship of the proletariat. The international proletariat, beginning with the Russians, must help in this tremendous task.
THE END
 



The League’s voluminous report on Japanese aggression in China gives the clearest evidence of America’s dominating world position. In no single respect does the League’s position differ from the one enunciated by Secretary Stimson on several occasions. It can be said that the interests of the great powers, in this instance, coincide with the interests of U.S. imperialism and are in opposition to those of Japan. That is true but does not negate American dominance.
The League demands Chinese sovereignty over Manchuria, but also requires that China grant autonomy to the three provinces. The report gives recognition also to Japan’s special interests in Manchuria. Thus the League grants to Japan its right to a “sphere of influence” in North China but it is not ready to see this sphere turned into an outright colony. Diplomacy works only through quid pro quos – through concessions or payments made for services rendered. At the moment, America has more to offer the League than Japan. The price demanded from Japan – attack on the Soviet Union – has been deferred too long to suit the League. Furthermore instead of marching further North, Japan has set her face South in China, much to the League’s chagrin. Thus the report states:
“Early in January 1933, occurred the serious incidents at Shanhaikwan, situated at the extremity of the Great Wall, halfway between Peiping and Mukden. This city has always been regarded as of great strategic importance. It is on the route followed by invaders who, coming from Manchuria, wish to penetrate into what is now the province of Hopei. Moreover, from Hopei is the easiest route into Jehol ...”
 
“International Cooperation”
The League, in short, cannot possibly allow vast sections of China to become Japanese colonies. It proposes international cooperation in Chinese reconstruction – since “the present political instability in China is an obstacle to friendship with Japan and an anxiety (!) to the rest of the world (as the maintenance of peace in the Far East is a matter of international concern) and since the conditions enumerated above cannot be fulfilled without a strong central government in China, the final requisite for a satisfactory solution is temporary cooperation in the internal reconstruction of China, as suggested by the late Dr. Sun Yat Sen.” Lest there be any doubt as to the League’s great altruism in desiring its hegemony rather than Japan’s in the “maintenance of peace” (no doubt by gunboat practise on the shores of the Yangtse) we are given the spectacle of the strengthening of the Chinese central government by the extension of the “rights of extraterritoriality” for three years to England, the U.S. and France. Nanking announced the abrogation of these rights in January 1930, and again in January 1931. But under cover of the present situation the powers (not the League, but the “powers” in the League!) have forced this concession as part payment for their stand against Japan.
The reason why Japan never formally declared war on China is that no “strong central government”, in fact no government at all, exists in China, according to the Japanese generals whose sole desire is, of course, the maintenance of law and order so that civilization may survive. “All the Chinese soldiers are bandits,” say the official Japanese spokesman. One wonders whether Washington is capable of wincing at the indelicate use of American diplomatic language. The League is in full accord with Japan’s views on China, but prefers, strangely enough, its own methods and interests for carving China to suit the powers.
Even in its present report the League straddles on the issue so that it has freedom to move in the “proper” direction with events. As Streit observes in the N.Y. Times,
“The report nowhere in so many words declares Japan the aggressor, or the violator of the Covenant ... This manner of expression is due to the fact that the great League powers are torn between the desire to maintain the sanctity of the Covenant and the fear of having to maintain it with its sanctions.”
 



Will Japan break with the League of Nations? Will the League go to the full extent of condemning Japan as the aggressor in Manchuria and recommending some form of action against Japanese imperialism? Or is this merely a sham fight to mislead the workers of the world into believing that the League is really an international organization for preserving peace and outlawing war?
The struggle among the robber imperialist powers is far from being a sham. In this period of capitalist decay, every capitalist country lights desperately to maintain and expand its markets and its economic power at the expense of every other country. Japan’s profound disturbance of the imperialist world’s balance of economic power in the Far East, its closing of the Manchurian frontiers to all but its own exploitation, arouses the greatest alarm among the rival imperialist bandits.
 
U.S. Takes Up Challenge
The direct threat to Yankee “influence” in China does not go unchallenged. The naval war maneuvers in the Pacific, the landing of troops in Hawaii, the charting for naval development of the Aleutian Islands with a view to attack Japan from the North to avoid her submarine bases, the discussions by U.S. army officers in technical magazines of the best methods of mobilizing and coordinating war industries – these are real enough moves towards war. U.S. pressure on the League applied by means of the lever of war debts, supplements the concern of the other great powers directly over their own exclusion from Manchuria, possibly from China in the near future, and also over the possibility of the breakdown of the League which would mean a threat to the Versailles Treaty and perhaps a new shuffle of the cards in Europe. The League’s action is, in this sense, dictated by a desire for self-preservation and for maintaining the status quo.
But is it possible for an imperialist war to break out between the U.S. and Japan while the Soviet Union is in existence? War breaks out whenever the ultimate, irrepressible economic causes find open and sufficient expression in immediate causes. The basic conflict of our epoch is that between the two economic systems, the capitalist and the Communist, systems of relations that cannot possibly continue indefinitely to exist side by side. The ultimate causes of war between the capitalist powers and the Soviet Union came into existence at the very birth of the proletarian revolution. Hitler in power in Germany will unquestionably precipitate immediate causes for this war. Already the German policy has changed with relation to Japan, a natural ally of Hitler in an anti-Soviet crusade, Hitler wants Japan to remain in Manchuria to be ready for invasion of the USSR. Hence, the German representative, von Keller’s opposition in the League to the proposal for a “neutral” body in Manchuria empowered to fix a time for withdrawal of Japanese troops, Just as at Shanghai.
The ultimate causes of war between the imperialists find expression in every daily newspaper. It is doubtful, however, whether the ruling classes of the capitalist nations will lose sight of their interests as a whole, as expressed in the absolutely fundamental antagonism to the dictatorship of the proletariat, to enter Into conflicts that inevitably are secondary and can wait. In any case, even if war broke out between the imperialist U.S. and Japan, their differences could be and would be patched up at once (for later resolving) in the event of an attack on the Soviet Union. The greedy calculating moves for greater advantage of the powers would not stop even during such a “holy” war, but would not only be all the more intensified.
The League, as the international mart for imperialist bargaining, is demanding its “price” from Japan for Manchuria. That price includes two guarantees: namely, that Japan halt where she is now without adding North China to her conquest, and that the Japanese generals must no longer “stall” in their implied promise to start the world conflagration by attack the Soviet Union. In that case there will be no break between the League and Japan.
 



If the world had any illusions that Japanese imperialism had actually relinquished its twenty-one demands forced on China in 1915 those illusions are by now completely dispelled. Japan is staking all on subjugating China before that nation can be unified, whether under bourgeois or proletarian hegemony. If the bourgeoisie succeeded in unifying China with the aid of American dollars it would mean the ultimate “peaceful penetration” of U.S. finance-capital and the ousting of both England and Japan from the Chinese market.
English capitalism, badly damaged by the War and no longer dominant on the international market, is not averse to seeing America become involved in war with Japan. Hence the attitude of the English government, reflected in the London Times, that the League has “done its part” and now countries with interests in the Far East (read America) “must themselves decide what policy is most likely to conduce to the early restoration of peaceful conditions,” etc. However the English press is likely to change its tune as soon as British interests in China are themselves directly threatened.
This threat to the other imperialist powers will not be long in the making. For the Japanese generals, following a schedule prepared long in advance, have given due notice of their next move; namely, an advance on Peiping and Tientsin. Of course, this new invasion is purely “defensive”; to oust Chang Hseuh-liang from North China so that his armies cannot attack the Japanese, and also to protect Jap nationals from the retreating Jehol armies. As the comments on the League’s Report made public by the Japanese diplomats state: “Japan is responsible for the maintenance of peace and order in the Far East” and she “intends to deal with China with the utmost good-will and forebearance”!
Meantime Jehol is being “mopped up”. With Manchuria completely in the hands of the Japanese army, perhaps the profits of the South Manchuria Railroad will be once more restored. Those profits began to decline alarmingly when the Chinese, with the aid of British and American capital, particularly the latter, began to build a unified network of railroads running North and South through Manchuria from Aigun on the Amur to Hulutao. This city on the sea-coast south of Dairen, was intended by the Chinese to compete with that Japanese terminal of the South Manchurian Railroad. Although the Chinese network was never completed, it had already begun to divert traffic from the Japanese-controlled road. The Japanese protested at this outrageous violation of “treaties” with China in which the latter had promised not to build parallel, competing railroads to the South Manchurian. This was one of the more immediate causes of the present campaign. The Japanese generals made it their first objective to gain the important strategic railheads on the Chinese network. Thus they have just occupied Peipiao, a railroad in the Jehol coal mining region. Hulutao will divert no more trade from Dairen if the Japanese can help it.
But the Japanese army will not stop even in Peiping and Tientsin if all goes well. The twenty-one demands attempted to set up four spheres of influence: Shantung, Manchuria and Eastern Inner Mongolia, Liaotung leased territory, and the Yangtse iron region. The campaign may yet develop along the Yangste River.
But a campaign South of the great wall will inevitably involve international “incidents”. Just as the murder of Captain Nakamura gave the Japs a pretext in 1931, so some similar occurrence may precipitate the world war that is brewing. For Japan this will not come unexpectedly. Having asked on the frontispiece of a new book The Army Manual, under a picture of the yawning muzzle of a great American field-piece, “Which way is this pointed?” Japanese imperialism answers by laying in supplies of cotton and iron for a long war. With Manchuria to supply food and ores the generals say they can “face the world”.
 



The turn-over of labor in industry is a vital index of workers’ living conditions. In Japan this index is artificially lowered by the method of involving workers in debt at the beginning of employment so as to keep them in bondage, and by the virtual imprisonment of labor in dormitories. Factory workers are allowed but two rest days a month by law and those in dormitories can only leave two to four times a month by special permission. Even so the turn-over in “normal” times is extremely high, official figures setting it at from 60 to 100 percent before the present crisis. The costliness of this turn-over may be gauged by the fact that it takes a year in silk mills to bring a recruit’s productivity up to average, yet the average term of work is but slightly more than one year. Nor do the girls who represent more than half of all factory workers (and 80 percent of all textile workers) transfer to other factories. They prefer to return home to marry – or they are forced into prostitution.
 
Trade Union Movement
The first attempts at organizing trade unions were ruthlessly suppressed by the government. The anti-union Act of 1900 remained in force with but minor changes up to 1926 when, following the English models of opportunist “harmony” unions designed with the aid of the ruling class to blunt and render harmless the weapons of working class organization, the Japanese government decided to foster and encourage company unionism by a new act recommending arbitration in labor disputes. This act has remained a dead letter on the statute books although company unions have spread. Trade unions still possess no legal status, the government cautiously tolerating reformist unions but ever ready to suppress “dangerous tendencies” without warning.
 
The Outburst of 1918 and After
As the cost of living rose to dizzy heights during the War, the workers were driven more and more by need to strike for higher wages. Whereas in 1914 there were only 50 strikes involving 7,900 workers, the number of strikes rose to 308 in 1917 and to 417 in 1918 involving, in the latter year 66,000 workers. The existing scarcity of food was aggravated by the Siberian adventure which necessitated the buying-up and diversion from the market of large stocks of rice. The pinch of hunger was felt everywhere by the masses.
Suddenly, without previous warning, the storm broke and there came the thunderclap of the spontaneous uprising of 1918. Starting in the obscure fisher village of Toyama where some fishermen’s wives stormed the rice shops for food for their starving children, the movement spread like wildfire among workers and peasants. The agrarian movement revealed its elemental power by the burning of the homes of large landowners in forty-two provinces, and the looting of granaries. In the space of a few days the workers in practically every large town and city poured out into the streets, banded together and, where they did not loot the shops directly, forced the sale of rise to pre-war prices. Troops were called out in every large city. The workers faced the troops and called on them not to fire on their brothers and sisters. The government, realizing the ultimate possibilities of the situation, threw the troops into the shops to sell food over the counters at low prices, yes, and to give free rice to the poor. Only when the movement began to recede were the troops used for shootings and brutal suppression, many of those who had bought rice at the lowered prices being thrown into prison for indeterminate periods.
Had there been the barest kernel of a Bolshevik party in Japan at this time, the year 1918 might well have been hailed as the “1905” of the Japanese working class. But no such organization existed, ready to place itself consciously at the head of the masses in action and to formulate the necessary political slogans in the light of the existing situation and the relation of forces. The masses were not aware of developments in Russia, the censorship acting as a “cordon sanitaire” to prevent the infecting of the Japanese workers. Whatever leadership did exist was more under the influence of anarcho-syndicalism than under that of Communism. Hence the complete lack of preparation for events, the sporadic character of the outburst and the lack of political demands that could have served as a focal point for later organization. Soviets were out of the question but demands to end the war, to grant universal suffrage, to recognize the right of the workers to organize – under the circumstances the democratic slogans could have been linked up with the more elemental demand for bread and peace.
Nevertheless the rice riots of 1918 form a turning-point in Japanese history. The masses learned their own power and the utter helplessness of the ruling class in the face of a mass outpouring into the streets. The seed was planted for making the workers conscious of their historic role. Consciously or not, the first step had been taken on the road to the conquest of power. Immediately the riots resulted in a great impetus to unionization. The unions became a force to be reckoned with, one that could no longer be safely suppressed by the ruling class. Instead the government and the “enlightened” capitalists were impelled to resort to the new methods of “boring from within” the unions, helping to create organizations for “harmony” and the “mutual interests” of capital and labor.
 
Anarcho-Syndicalism and the Unions
In 1906 the worker-intellectual Kotoku returned to Japan from the U.S. where he had been active in the ranks of the IWW. Kotoku brought to Japan the best traditions of this movement, an insufficiently grounded but revolutionary precursor of Communism. The movement thus founded was ruthlessly hounded by the police until temporarily suppressed after the discovery of a bomb plot against the Emperor in 1911 for which eleven men and one woman were executed. Despite this inevitable result of individualist terror, the basic ideas of syndicalism, direct mass action and industrial unionism, penetrated deeply into some of the unions, particularly those organized in the newly-built dockyards, destined soon to closure under the blight of the after-the-war crisis of 1920. Encouraged by the uprising of 1918 in which they had taken a leading part, the syndicalists led several great dockyard strikes during the years 1919 and 1921. In the Kawasaki and Mitsubishi dockyard strikes of 1921 there was exhibited the inspiringly heroic solidarity of thousands of workers. To combat the rapid spread of unemployment now engulfing the working masses, the strikers set up the slogan of workers’ (syndicate) control and management of the shops. Many strikers felt that the proletarian revolution was at hand.
These strikes were the high point of syndicalist influence in Japan. They illustrate the splendid fighting qualities of the syndicalists but also the inevitable downfall of a workers’ movement that attempts to ignore the state with its special armed forces prepared to crush any revolt. These strike struggles and the political consequences form an object lesson of the absolute need of a revolutionary vanguard in the form of the Communist party armed with the Marxian theory of the state, analyzing every hew situation by means of its dialectic class approach and thus prepared to put forward correct tactics based on correct policies.
(To be continued)
 



Can there be any greater irony than that the Comintern, founded by Lenin and Trotsky, should urge the Japanese Communists to gain “legality” at any price, including the yielding of its own platform and program? What better object lesson is required of the extreme importance of maintaining unity of action through clarity of policy and unity of point of view – that is, through, restriction of the membership of the Party to those advanced workers only, who accept Marxism and the Leninist concept of discipline – than the rich history of the Russian Bolshevik Party? And under what striking similarity of conditions! Yet history presented that irony in Japan as elsewhere. Fortunately the adventure proved in vain.
It is the function of the Party to utilize every vital activity of the proletariat to lead and direct the class along the road to power. In the light of its ultimate “illegal” revolutionary goal – the dictatorship of the proletariat – the Party demands democracy not for its own sake but for the political education of the masses, for their disillusioning with all reformist methods and objectives. The Party demands the “right” to propagate its own revolutionary platform and if this right jeopardizes democracy, so much the worse for democracy. The workers must fight for democracy, for legality of the Party, for reforms, – but this struggle must never leave the masses in doubt as to the position of the Communists who, taking the objective conditions of the moment and their future trend into account, advance the interests of the working-class as a whole so as to strengthen the class for further struggle along the road to power. Even those Communist parties that have achieved legality never forget for a single instant that they may, under changing circumstances, be forced underground.
Universal suffrage was granted to the Japanese workers under the strong pressure of the masses. But it bore also a different character. It was used as a pawn by the bourgeois capitalists in an attempt to win over the workers and the petty bourgeoisie for a struggle against the militarists. The capitalists would prefer, if possible, peaceful penetration to outright conquest in China. But the struggle proved abortive, the capitalists were tied hand and foot to the war machine. Furthermore the internal crisis resolved the problem for the capitalist imperialists by its urgent demand for the most desperate remedies. Not in vain are the changes in the mode of production and in the productive forces the “shock factors” of historic development!
The moment universal suffrage was promised, in 1925, the militarists prepared carefully for any untoward eventualities. Baron Tanaka – the author of the Tanaka document – immediately resigned from the army and became president of the Seijukai Party. In the eyes of the military clique the situation called for a “strong” man, a Bonaparte. And Tanaka was groomed for the task at precisely the same moment and in precisely the same fashion as Marshal von Hindenburg (as President) in Germany. Tanaka became premier in the first elections held under universal suffrage, elections so tainted by fraud and corruption, so strongly controlled by acts of autocracy that to stifle the angry criticism of the masses a thousand workers and intellectuals were arrested under the frame-up of a nation-wide Communist plot. The Tanaka regime ended in scandals strikingly like those of the Harding administration in America.
The wily Japanese capitalists have made every effort to establish the two-party system in Japanese politics. The Seijukai may be compared with the English tory party, the Minseito with the whigs. Both parties are under complete boss control. The party platforms mean nothing, are much alike, in fact do not vary from election to election. The government connection with big business, plain enough in America, is far more open in Japan. The party leaders become directors of the South Manchuria Railroad, of steamship companies, etc. These leaders cannot reward their followers with government jobs as these are reserved for the bureaucracy under the military clique. Hence, the parties resort to a more open cash system. The cost of elections is far greater, owing to greater corruption, than in other countries, and elections are more frequent. Before the War it took more than 20,000 yen to elect a man to the Diet. Now it costs more. Each candidate pays one-half the requisite sum – the party the rest. Since four hundred are elected each time, party expenses are enormous, control falling naturally into the hands of the rich (as elsewhere). The pay in the Diet is small but bribery for concessions and purchases provide rich plums.
The workers have no illusions concerning the bourgeois parties whose history has been all too short to permit the use of those refined niceties of technique of the Western countries. The masses pin little faith in types like the first great “commoner”, premier, Hara, who came to power after the Rice-Riots. This lawyer in the pay of the copper king, Furukawa, this liberal whose doctrines were expressed in his remark: “My platform is a blank sheet of paper. I can write upon it what I will”, was the willing tool of the military in the Siberian adventure. It was Hara and his minister for Home Affairs, Tokonanu (one of the worst suppressors of free speech and the press), who organized one of the largest of the thirty reactionary societies ready at all times to attack the workers. Despite his personal bodyguard, despite his great services in the interests of the ruling class, Hara was assassinated for the slight difference that existed between the interests of finance capital and those of the militarists.
Japanese history embodies a great lore of bloody deeds of vengeance. When feudal society was dissolved by decree, there remained a class of “masterless men”, the former samurai whose only occupation had been the wielding of the sword in the services of some lord. These ronin form the hirelings of the reactionaries in politics to convey and carry out threats against political opponents. Assassinations by these feudal mercenaries are of frequent occurrence.
In the split that followed the debacle of the all-embracing farmer-labor mass party, three parties gradually crystallized out, each one supported by a split-off section of the trade unions. The writer has been unable to obtain sufficient data as to the precise activities of the Communists in the various splits so that he can merely enumerate the parties and their strength. The Japanese General Federation of Labor supports the Shakai Minshuto (Right wing social democratic party) which obtained 165,000 votes and 4 seats in the 1928 elections. The Nihon Ronoto – Japanese Labor-Farmer Party was organized by the centrists of the General Federation of Japanese Labor and Farmers. It captured 2 seats with 96,000 votes in 1928. The Left wing organized the Rodo Nominto which obtained no seats despite its 85,000 votes. The centrists and Left wing parties were both dissolved by the government as being dangerous. However, the party reorganized, the Lefts forming the Shin Ronoto (Labor Farmer Party) in 1929. The centrists formed the Ninon Taishuto or Japan Mass Party. In the 1930 elections the combined vote of the parties was over half a million.
From the attacks made by Japanese Communists at the present time on the “social Fascists” of the other worker parties, it is clear that the Japanese Communists have followed blindly the Stalinist zig-zag tactics, tactics that have resulted at this crucial moment in the history of the working class of the world, in causing loss of confidence in the vanguard by the Japanese masses. Although we cannot accept without question the opinion of so confirmed an enemy of the Communists as Matsuoka of the Japanese General Federation of Labor, yet there is a sufficient element of truth in his remark, made in 1929:
“The Communist movement is getting more and more idealized and formularized. In other words the movement has become one of students or young men and women; it is diverging increasingly from the practical fighting line, so that it is coming more and more under the surveillance of the Minister of Education than that of the Home Minister. Their sphere of action is passing from the factories, mines and agrarian villages to the schools and colleges.”
(To be continued)
 



The High Speed of Japanese Development
A striking feature of post-war Japanese development is its rapid tempo. Born in the epoch of imperialism, Japanese capitalism, even before it has attained full maturity, undergoes all the sicknesses of decay – the stifling of expanding productive forces by the shrinking of markets. Its internal woes are so profound that desperate remedies are sought; hence the imperialist venture in China, a venture that not only sacrifices the lives of Japanese – and Chinese – workers for capitalist profit, but that demands for its accomplishment ever greater diversion of resources, growing budgets and mounting deficits, hence more intense exploitation of workers and peasants. The national income must be reapportioned; the middle class is taxed at the unbelievable rate of 30 percent of its earnings (every citizen with an income of $150. or more is taxed); the workers must receive even less than their previous pittance. In short, the class struggle is intensified at a pace corresponding to the unbounded program of imperialist expansion.
But not only does Japanese imperialism accomplish forced marches in the strain of catching up with the rival powers. The working class, too, undergoes rapid transformations. In the single decade since the war, the Japanese proletariat has condensed the long experience of a whole century, of British development. Today the Japanese workers are strung out along the road of development with a rear-guard of opportunists and reformists always ready to desert and betray the vanguard of Communists in time of battle.
During this decade of proletarian growth the economic and political changes have followed each other with great rapidity – a sure indication of the revolutionary possibilities. The workers have shown themselves acutely sensitive to the international labor movement, hut unless a leadership is built up that is grounded in Marxian principles, the principles of the Bolshevik-Leninists, and is at the same time, flexible in its tactics, with regard to the changing relations of forces, the results may well be disastrous for the working class.
 
Reformism and Opportunism<&h4>
The great influence of syndicalism, later of Communism, in the post-war era forced the shrewd ruling class of Japan to avail itself of the generous assistance of reformism in attempting to trick the proletariat into following the path of “peaceful” agitation and development. The illuminating experiences of the English working class since the Chartist movement, the course followed by the revisionists in German social-democracy, the history of the second international – these lessons of betrayal were not learned in vain by Japanese politicians and capitalists. The classic method of dividing and ruling is applied in the union movement and on the political arena by the government’s policy of encouraging the growth of Right wing organizations and suppressing brutally the Left wing. Thus the Yuaikai (Friendly Society of Laborers), organized in 1912 by the Christian socialist, Suzuki (the Gompers of Japan), under the patronage of one of the Elder Statesmen, was transformed into the Japanese General Federation of Labor in 1919. Its function was to combat syndicalism and divert the workers from the “dangerous” road of class struggle and mass action. Through the leadership of this federation of 46 unions with its 33,000 workers, and that of the 82,000 members of the Seamen’s Union and the 42,000 members of the Naval Workers’ Union, the capitalists hoped to create a division between the skilled and the unskilled, to form an aristocracy of labor, on the lines of the AF of L, that could be bribed into acquiescence to capitalist policy. Fortunately syndicalist influence and the lateness of development of Japanese unions, permitting their utilization of international experience, assured the formation of industrial unions. Only 9 percent of the organized workers are in craft unions, thus eliminating the artificial and fratricidal struggles between unions over jurisdiction.
If workers too often fail to realize the decisive importance of the class controlling an organization, the employers have no illusions on this score. The bosses in Japan, have organized shop committees and company unions on a wide scale. In fact they now embrace 340,000 workers, as many as have been permitted to organize in all the workers’ unions combined.
The year 1919 saw the gradual spread of information concerning the Russian Revolution among the workers. The spread of Communist ideas terrified governing circles and brought on a period of white terror that has not abated to the present time. The crisis of 1920 with its mass unemployment did not help to reassure the upper class. Nor did the Kobe strike of 1921 with its great solidarity parade of 30,000 workers. In 1922 the Comintern established relations with Japanese comrades and started an illegal, underground movement. The movement has remained small but exerts a profound influence despite the committing of many blunders under Stalinist control.
The earthquake of 1923 gave the government its opportunity to behead the proletarian movement. The police and the military incited the reactionaries and their dupes among the masses to murder all Koreans under the pretext that they were responsible for the terrible conflagrations that broke out as a result of the quake. Simultaneously with the most brutal massacre of thousands of Koreans, those most exploited workers in Japan, performing the dirtiest work with the outcaste Etas, the soldiery seized hundreds of radicals of all shades and put the most prominent ones to the sword. In cruelty and cold-bloodedness this exploit of the Mikado outdid any of the Czar’s pogroms of the Jews.
 
The Communists and the Labor Party
The promise by the government of universal suffrage in 1925 (the actual voting not to take place till 1928), started widespread agitation for the formation of working class political parties. The Right wing leaders In the unions at first looked askance at this new development, seeing in it a threat to their bureaucratic control through the organization of a rival leadership. But the example of the British Labor Party, then coming into power, heartened them and caused the attempt of creating a political party under union auspices. This same year saw the split of the General Federation of Labor – with what aid from the Communists is not clear but quite easily to be inferred from international developments in the “third period” – into Right and Left wings, the latter including syndicalists to an even greater extent than Communists. Had the Communist party, despite the persecution and the handicaps of illegality, presented as clearly as was possible under the circumstances, their own political outlook had they differentiated themselves sharply from the opportunist elements a large section of the syndicalists could have been won over to Communism, not to speak of other Left wing workers. But the Anglo-Russian Committee, the bloc of the Chinese party with the Kuo Min Tang, in short the obliteration and dispersing of the vanguard in the mass of uncrystallized workers, the voluntary yielding of initiative by the only force capable of leading the workers correctly to that force designed only to mislead – all this saw its counterpart in the attempts of the Communists, under the direction of the Comintern, to form a mass labor party.
The Peasants’ Union (50,000 members) issued the call for all workers to unite in a proletarian party. In No. 16 of the Communist International may be found the attitude of the Comintern on the entire question. Vasiliev writes enthusiastically hailing the call. “Not only labor and progressive peasant elements are interested in the organization of a new party aiming at the thorough democratization of the State – the whole country demands this”!! Further “the Communist wing of the commission for the formation of the proletarian party formulated its own platform as follows: ‘The aim of the proletarian party is struggle against imperialism and the menace of imperialist wars. The slogans are: Korea’s and other colonies’ rights to self-determination; hands off China!, those who till the land must own it; the 8 hour day; work or full maintenance for unemployed; workers’ control; universal suffrage for all citizens over the age of 18; democratic liberties; abrogation of laws directed against the labor movement; abolition of the Upper Chamber and the Genro Council.’” Its immediate slogan is the “workers’ and peasants’ government”. Vasiliev adds naively that “after a perusal of the draft programs of action of the Left and the reformists, one is struck by the similarity of the most important points of the political and economic demands.” He sees the conditions for a united front as very propitious. “Through their work within the proletarian party, the Japanese Communists will no doubt soon be able to grapple with the task of developing their ranks into a mass Leninist party with a strictly revolutionary program and iron discipline.”
In No. 17 of the Communist International, after the complete fiasco of the all-embracing mass party, we find the following gem:
“The reformists, after their unsuccessful attempts to balk the formation of the Proletarian Party by refusing participation, decided to achieve their sabotaging work by drawing up a program provoking the Left to a split. The latter took up a firm position, and acquiesced in making every concession if only to obtain the organization of a legal mass party. In their desire to preserve the legal physiognomy of the new party, the Left went so far that they abandoned without any reserves the demand for the independence of the colonies (they agreed to autonomy) and agreed to the abandonment of the demand for the confiscation of the land without compensation. But the reformists, who had previously come to an agreement with the police, quit the inaugural congress of the Proletarian party, declaring that they did not desire to be a weapon in the hands of the Left. The Lefts, continuing their policy of guaranteeing legality to the new party at all costs, also left the congress. The delegates of the Peasant Union and the Suiheisha remained in the congress.”
Of course, the police closed the congress down anyhow. But to go on: “But the reformists will not enjoy their victory for long. Even if at first the Proletarian party did not have a program of action worked out according to all the rules of Lenin, etc., even if in its program it made opportunist, reformist, false steps, all this is not so essentially important. What is important is the fundamental fact that the working and peasant masses are being brought into the proletarian party and it is also important that the objective situation of the country unrestrainedly urges the Japanese workers and peasants to decisive acts and big tasks.”
(To be continued)
 



The democratic phase of the Chinese revolution included as its major task the ousting of the foreign imperialists and the national unification of China. This task could only have been accomplished with the aid of the wide masses of workers and peasants. The revolution swept towards the goal of its first phase only as long as the Chinese masses were drawn irresistibly and on an ever grander scale into the movement for liberation. It was inevitable, however, that the oppressed classes, on whom rested the actual burden of carrying on the armed struggle, under the ferment of revolutionary activity, should come into conflict not only with the foreign oppressors but with their own native exploiters. This phase of the Chinese revolution did not wait upon the successful achievement of the program of unification common to all classes, bourgeois, worker and peasant, participating in the first stage. The irrepressible class struggle broke out before the imperialists had been swept into the sea and in the conflict that followed the vanguard of the working class, the Communists, on whom depended the continuation of the revolution, was all but exterminated.
 
Failure to Unify China
The Chinese bourgeoisie preferred far rather the continued strangling of China by the imperialist powers, so long as they were permitted to continue their own exploitation, than their own overthrow and their disappearance as a class through the dictatorship of the proletariat. But with the bloody suppression of the revolutionary workers and peasants, the native bourgeoisie, with the willing assistance of foreign imperialism, became the spear-head of counterrevolution in China. The revolution ebbed and the aim of unification failed of accomplishment because the masses did not succeed In marching forward, under the leadership of the Communists, beyond the narrower first aims of the revolution, to the conquest of power under working class dictatorship. Thus the Chinese revolution is a negative example (one hesitates to call it a “living” example) of the theory of the permanent revolution.
The lessons of the second phase of the Revolution remain as an abiding memory in the minds of the present bourgeois rulers of China. If today they are completely impotent in the defense of China against Japanese imperialism, it is because they fear above everything else to arouse the masses and arm them for a real struggle. For that would mean the resurrection of the Revolution which, they clearly see, could only result in their own downfall ultimately. Chiang Kai-Shek, instead of sending a single soldier to Jehol for the defense of China against imperialist invasion, continues to battle with the peasant Soviets in his effort to establish his hegemony, if only in a few provinces. T.Y. Soong, reactionary banker – the richest man in China – can only say at this juncture that the Japanese aggression is a good thing, for “in the long run” it will result in the “real” unification of China. Meantime he impotently offers, not any attempt at effective resistance, but the lives of one hundred million Chinamen to the Japs. These Chinamen “will know how to die”. All the mercenary, thieving bandit rulers and bourgeois compradores are sending their wealth, that ill-gotten wealth coined out of the blood of the Chinese masses, out of the country and are “disappearing” themselves. “Governor” Tang Yu-lin of Jehol, that great opium drugsman of China, carefully evacuated his gold and his wives and has now left Jehol himself for destinations unknown.
 
The Japanese Continue Advance
Thus the Japanese conquer with almost no resistance because China under the rule of the Chiang Kai-Sheks has failed to unify and has failed to build up its industries rapidly enough to supply a modern army. Having met no real obstacles, the Japanese will continue to seize more and more Chinese territory. The press repeats statements that the Japanese have demanded the withdrawal of Chinese troops from Tienstin, the next objective of the invasion.
 



With laudable thoughtfulness, the Japanese imperialists lay their plans in advance and then follow their schedule carefully. Many moons ago, a Japanese “surveyor”, engaged in political surveying in Inner Mongolia for the followers of Baron Tanaka, discovered an obscure prince, the “direct descendant of the great Genghis Khan”. This Mongolian prince could never have dreamed how fortunate was his fateful meeting with the awe-struck Jap. For lo and behold, the press already hints at the Japanese desire to restore this scion to his rightful place at the head of a new Mongolian state to be called Tayuankuo.
Thus the Japanese militarists continue to build a foundation for the ultimate struggle with the Soviet Union. Inner Mongolia will follow the road of Manchuria and Jehol, possibly after the conquest of North China. If the powers continue to jockey for position in the present situation, each hoping to reap the benefits while the other pays the piper; if there is no real pressure applied to Japan to halt her march into China, it is because they expect Japan to pay the price, military intervention in Siberia. Of course America and England are careful to establish the record that will be relied upon in the more distant future to solve their internal conflicts. But as yet, that is merely a record.
 
Russia and Japan
What is the order in which capitalist powers place their enemies? Read the careful, restrained press accounts of the Japanese advance into Asia, note the gentlemanly manner in which reference is made to their astute campaigning. Then recall the violent, almost insane, attacks made periodically in the decade after the October revolution on the Soviets and their leaders. The vituperation carried on by Hitler against the German Communists is tame compared to the vicious campaign of slander recorded in the capitalist press of the entire world against the Russian Bolsheviks. In the light of that experience, one can easily pigeon-hole the present quarrel with Japan as a family affair. Despite all the failures and blunders of the Stalin bureaucracy, the Soviets still remain the nightmare of capitalism, spelling the twilight of imperialism.
At bottom that is the explanation of the Stimson note to the League accepting its invitation to express on accord in view. For Stimson refuses to be solidly linked with Geneva and while agreeing blandly “in general” and “in principle” with the League’s position, he will not permit America to be pushed into war at this time. London will not reap the harvest if Washington can help it.
London again reveals her backing of Japan by declaring an arms embargo, whose patent fraud is recognized in the bourgeois press here and abroad. Present contracts are inviolable. And pray for how many years do the contracts run? How much has been allotted to Japan by Vickers-Armstrong? In the debate on the embargo that inimitable pooh-bah, Lansbury, reveals the inner hollowness of the social democracy. He states that it is impossible to exclude the possibility of war between Japan and Russia. But, he adds, it is not true that Japan is holding back the forces of Communism. No, says Lansbury, do not give Japan credit for that. The credit should doubtless go to the insipid Lansburys and the social democratic betrayers. Lansbury expresses faith that the U.S. will “act right”. Indeed she will! One hundred percent “right”, for American imperialism.
The attitude of Soviet Russia on the present situation is still being awaited, not only by the bourgeoisie but by the Communists of the world. Russian diplomacy under the blind, opportunist “guidance” of Litvinov, has tasted all the fruits of that shrivelled tree, socialism in one country. Again and again the lasting interests of the world proletariat have been sacrificed to the desire for immediate “benefits” for the Soviet Union. Russian diplomacy is again placed in the dilemma of deciding which road to follow. If the Soviets properly denounce the entire fraud being perpetrated by the League of Nations, the Russian “diplomats” feel that the chances for recognition by America will be jeopardized. If the Soviet Union agrees to “cooperate” with the League then in the immediate situation Russia again renounces her leadership of the proletariat. Can we hope for any change of policy? Or will we witness a new compromise?
 







The following article is a contribution to the discussion on the NRA. It represents the views of the author. Other articles are invited but should not exceed 700 words.





(Continued from last week)
The slogan of nationalization of industries is at the present stage not one of immediate agitation but rather a propaganda slogan laying the basis and setting directives for the movement in the period of upheaval which lies ahead. Even with American economic development taking the most favorable course for the capitalist class – even, that is, with a coinciding of the NRA and a real expansion of production resulting in the temporary liquidation of the crisis, – the class struggle will necessarily take on new forms owing to the trend of development towards state capitalism. The “new” capitalism will be militantly imperialistic. The violent struggle for control of markets will base itself at home on the ever more oppressive exploitation of the working class. For the moment the stream of mass pressure follows the Roosevelt, but as events (the progress of inflation for example) clarify the situation the stream will over the confining walls.
We cannot wait expectantly for swell and become a flood breaking the period of open struggle to “educate” the workers. We must set forth our views and a corresponding plan of action now, correcting in the light of events those errors that will naturally adhere to our rough draft as we go along. Meantime we patiently answer the queries and objections raised by the serious workers looking for a solution to their problems.
 
Compensation or No Compensation?
In the mind of the worker the question of compensation naturally arises when nationalization is under consideration. Losovsky, in approving of the slogan at the 15th C.P.S.U. Congress in 1927 thought that the fight for “no compensation” serves to distinguish the Communist from the socialist. But to Trotsky, viewing the slogan as a means of engaging the workers in a gigantic struggle with the bourgeoisie, the question of compensation is entirely secondary, if not irrelevant. It is entirely a matter of objective conditions and not a matter of principle, as is indicated in the work Whither England:
“Besides the financial side of the question is of ‘secondary importance. The principal task is to create the political conditions for nationalization, whether by purchase or without purchase, that is of no importance. In the last instance it is a matter of life and death for the bourgeoisie. Revolution is inevitable for the reason that the bourgeoisie will never permit itself to be strangled by Fabian banking operations. Even a partial nationalization can be undertaken by bourgeois society in its present form, only by surrounding it with such conditions as would render the success of these measures extremely doubtful, thus compromising the principle of nationalization and with it the Labor Party. The bourgeoisie would oppose as a class every straightforward attempt at even a partial nationalization. The other branches of industry would resort to lockouts, to sabotage, to a boycott of the national industry; i.e., bring about a life and death struggle. However guarded the first steps might be, the task will nevertheless lead to the necessity of breaking the opposition of the exploiters.”
Here we have clearly given the dialectic nature of the struggle for nationalization.
 
Nationalization and the Labor Party
The U.M.W. Committee on Nationalization stated in their report in 1924 that the struggle for nationalization would build up a labor party. We Communists are opposed to the formation of a labor party. Why then propose nationalization?
It might be conceded, for example, that in the case of England, where the Labor Party existed as a stumbling block in the road of the proletariat, it was perfectly proper for the Communists not merely to pose the problem of nationalization but to set in motion mass pressure for an actual struggle for its realization, at the same time pointing out its inadequacy. But how does this apply to America where the masses are so backward, where the Left organizations, even including the reformists in this category, are so few in number? The answer depends on our judgment as to the mode of awakening of the political class consciousness of the masses and the speed with which this will occur. We are opposed to the formation of a labor party here because among other things the English experience warned us how such a party diverts the energy of the masses from a real struggle acts as a brake and helps to defeat our aims. But in that case it is our duty to take over those slogans which appeal to the masses and lead in a progressive direction making them the basis not for programs to fool the masses, but for filling them with our content actual class struggles conducted with every weapon in our power.
 
Our Tasks
The way in which even now the workers are showing initiative in taking full advantage of the “pacifying” collective bargaining clause in the NRA, gives every hope for expecting the speedy political development of class consciousness in the American working class. In that case the slogans of national ization and of workers’ control of industry will be pushed more and more to the fore and we must be ready to fill them with our class content at the proper time, and to make them the basis for a real and not a sham battle. Under proper conditions these slogans offer every possibility of rallying the miners the railroad workers and the entire working class for a struggle against the capitalists, they offer a means of striking a blow at finance capital, and with a real struggle the permit development of our strategy on the widest scale for orienting the working class towards the seizure of power.
We must not expect that the slogan will appear in America under the same set of conditions as elsewhere. We work with conditions as we find them and not as we would like to have them. It is ot at all necessary that a labor party or a reformist movement exist to advance such slogans, nor that a labor party arise as the direct result of their advancement. If in advanced countries the period of preparation for the seizure of power and the dictatorship of the proletariat will be more prolonged but the actual seizure of power will be much foreshortened, then these intermediate slogans will live their brief existence for the purpose of crystallizing the struggle, only to be quickly transformed in the course of the struggle.
Roosevelt is acting as the spearhead of the bourgeois attack on the working class, on its former standards of livelihood. The workers think at the moment that he is actually encouraging unionization and many are flocking into the A.F. of L. It is our plain duty to go with them and to form a Left wing in the unions. We must help set up workers’ codes of action leading towards workers’ control and nationalization. We must help set up permanent shop (grievance) committees at first ostensibly for the purpose of disclosing violations of the NRA, later gradually reaching out for the closed shop and for ever greater workers’ control of production. Through the shop committees we must propagandize the workers’ codes of action. Unless we prepare now we cannot hope to win the masses in time when, through its inner contradictions, the capitalist program falls through and the question of power becomes the order of the day.
 







This article deals with a subject which has not formerly been discussed in the Militant, it is therefore accepted explicitly as a discussion article. The views expressed are those of the writer. Other contributions in discussion of this subject are invited, but they should not exceed 700 words – Ed.





(Continued from last issue)
In answer to the industrial codes adopted by the capitalists in their desperately organized attempt to bring about “recovery” from the crisis, the Communists have now the task, with the aid of the workers in the several industries, of laying out specific workers’ codes of action. But before proceeding with a model of such a code of action as applied to coal mining and involving the slogans of nationalization and workers’ control, it may help to forestall first of all objections raised against these slogans “in principle”.
No field offers greater danger of blundering and of falling into opportunism than that of partial demands and intermediate slogans. Nevertheless the Communist does not reject such demands and slogans in toto just because there is this danger. A criterion for the choice of our tactics and slogans was given by Lenin in his brochure on Left Communism: “The whole point lies in being able to apply these tactics to raise and not to lover the general level of proletarian class-consciousness and revolutionary ability to fight and conquer.” Thus the decision as to the correctness or incorrectness of a slogan rests to a large extent on our judgment of the ripeness or unripeness, not of the advanced workers but of the mass of workers to rally around and fight for a given slogan. Our purpose is not to sink to the level of the backward masses, not to hide the truth from them by sinking into opportunism, not to win them over to false slogans and to a false ideology, but to take into account as an objective factor for us, the Communists, the present mood, state of consciousness and preparedness of the class as a whole.
Life alone is the final arbiter in the matter of choice of tactics. Literature is never decisive, but it can be extremely helpful if properly understood and applied. In this sense it would be a worthwhile task to collate all the writings, particularly since the formation of the Comintern, on the questions of nationalization and workers’ control. For particularly at the present moment in America, with events moving at tremendous speed, with the working class commencing anew its lessons in organization first of all in trade unions, with the posing of economic and political problems to the workers on a vaster scale than ever before in American history, it is of vital importance that we understand their true dialectic nature, their usefulness in elevating the plane of struggle at the proper moment from that of immediate and intermediate demands to that of power, and consequently their proper place in the strategy of revolution.
 
The Struggle Against Ultra-Leftism
Theses on Partial Demands and Intermediate Slogans were adopted by the Leninist Third and Fourth Congresses of the Comintern. Just before the Third Congress Lenin gave cognizance to the sharp ultra-Leftist trend in the international movement with Bucharin as its foremost theoretician in the Soviet Union. Lenin wrote his pamphlet on “Left Communism” to combat this infantilism and had it distributed among the delegates to the Third Congress in order to alter the “intransigent” attitude of some towards partial demands and slogans. So much did the false position of Bucharin and others cause concern to Lenin that be took the unprecedented step of announcing at the Congress that he spoke in favor of the theses proposed on partial demands only under the discipline of his fraction. Between the Third and Fourth Congresses, Lenin, Trotsky, Radek and Zinoviev carried on a struggle against the ultra-Leftist position to such good purpose that at the Fourth Congress Bucharin himself was forced to read a Declaration in which the Russian fraction announced that they considered as false and incorrect the view expressed on partial demands, the idea that these were opportunist, in the Third Congress theses.
In his desire to correct the views which had caused Bucharin and others to attack Lenin and Trotsky as Rightists and opportunists at the Third Congress, Lenin posed the questions at issue in the simplest yet sharpest terms. For example:
“Communists, adherents of the Third International, exist in all countries precisely for the purpose of adapting, along the whole line in every domain of life, the old socialist, trade unionist, syndicalist and parliamentarian activities to the new Communist idea.”
Again:
“We do not know and we cannot know which of the inflammable sparks which now fly in all countries, fanned by the economic and political world crisis, will be the one to start the conflagration (in the sense of a particular awakening of the masses); we are therefore bound to utilize our new Communist principles in the cultivation of all and every field of endeavor no matter how old, rotten, and seemingly hopeless.”
What were the specific issues in the controversy over partial demands? Radek, working closely together with Lenin and Trotsky at that time, proposed for capitalist countries (particularly but not solely for Germany), the ideas of partial confiscation of capitalist property (statification of trusts), workers’ government, workers’ control of production. These slogans were not given for the future when a revolutionary situation would once more arise, but for the period preceding it and which is preparing it. And in view of the existence of the separate organizations of the working masses at that time (2nd, 2nd and one-half, 3rd internationals, and social democratic trade unions), Radek proposed the adoption of the United Front tactic to carry out these slogans. Bucharin was so much opposed to the United Front tactic as to the slogans to which this tactic was to be applied. In the settling of this controversy, it was carried before an enlarged Plenum of the C.I. in Dec. 1921 when for the first time the C.I. gave its formal adherence to the tactic of the United Front despite the argument of Bucharin that this essentially class slogan might become, in a pre-revolutionary situation, a cover for class collaboration.
The argument against intermediate slogans as being essentially class collaboration (including that against the United Front), would be correct if these slogans are divorced from the slogans involving the struggle for power and for the seizure of industries and these latter from a real mass struggle. To hide our real views and ultimate goal would be to practice opportunism. At all times we warn the workers that their final salvation under capitalism is an utter illusion, that even the partial nationalization of any industry cannot help the working class in any final sense, that only the workers can achieve their own emancipation, and only by the overthrow of the capitalist system and the seizure of all industries by the workers.
(To Be Continued)
 







This article introduces a subject which has not formerly been discussed in the Militant, it is therefore accepted explicitly as a discussion article. The views expressed are those of the writer. Other contributions in discussion of this subject are invited, but they should not exceed 700 words – Ed.





Part 1

Part 2

Part 3
 







This article introduces a subject which has not formerly been discussed in the Militant, it is therefore accepted explicitly as a discussion article. The views expressed are those of the writer. Other contributions in discussion of this subject are invited, but they should not exceed 700 words – Ed.





The bourgeoisie is presenting the National Industrial Recovery Act as the answer to the Soviets Five Year Plan, as the “better road” of capitalist planned economy. The “plan” which is to solve the present crisis and bring capitalism out of the wilderness into the promised land, envisages the formation of trusts along the lines of European cartels on a semi-voluntary basis for the purpose of regulating competition, allocating production, setting standards of minimum wages and maximum hours of work. It includes the aim of raising prices and increasing the purchasing power of the masses.
 
Exposure of NRA Our Task
It is the obvious task of the Communist to expose this bourgeois method of solving the problems of the crisis solely for its own benefit with the most shameless and criminal disregard of the mode of existence of the working class. This exposure takes on a wide scope. What is here presented is part of a larger discussion on the new problems posed by NRA.

We must show that NRA is nothing but a scheme for re-establishing of profits for the capitalists and so ordering industry as to give the ruling class an all-the-more powerful grip on the means of production, the basis of exploitation.
 
It is an attempt to organize American capitalism on a stronger base for the purposes of imperialist expansion. Naturally this includes the possibility of quickly transforming economy to a war footing when the occasion arises. And in fact the present campaign to put over the NRA is but the prelude, the rehearsal for a war campaign. America is in desperate need of imperialist bases on the Asiatic mainland.
 
It permits more efficient and concentrated action against the working class in the event of workers’ resistance. At the same time by the demagogy of fake wage increases and the inculcating of the idea that the government stands above the classes ready to mediate in the interests of all, it tries to lull the workers into passive acceptance.
 
NRA is an organized method for unloading the crisis on the backs of the workers, it is the organized method under government auspices of setting the most wretched living standards for the proletariat. It is the nation-wide stagger plan which reduces hours of work, at the same time throwing the sop to the workers of a nominal increase of hourly pay, the net result being that the workers lose about one week’s pay a mouth. The wages thus saved, it is hoped, will be used by the bosses to hire extra hands.
 
NRA is the attempt to dragoon the workers either in company unions or under the leadership of the treacherous class collaborationists. It is a weapon drawn against resist the wiles of class collaboration, then the open shop will be put over on the entire American working class.
 

N.R.A. vs. Planned Economy

We must emphasize also that this “plan” is peculiarly unlike what we know as planned economy. For planned economy is the organizing of industry for ever greater production, for the increase of commodities, not for their restriction. This so-called plan is rather the organizing of waste, of sabotage of production, of restrictions of output – in short it is the organizing of hunger with the greatest ingenuity, simply and solely for profits. The allocation of production within the cartel means rendering idle and useless a large percentage of the machinery of production. It has even been proposed to tax such idle machinery out of existence. (Note Eastman’s plan for scrapping old railroad equipment.) The plan supposedly involves the figuring of costs of production, but to engage in any real analyses of the capitalist mode of production would mean the exposure of its anarchy before the entire working class, would show up the serious disproportions of capitalism in the various sections of the country, would expose to full view the waste and inefficiency of production under the present system, particularly as concerns the quantity of machinery left in complete, idleness in the various large plants. Rather than attempt to set a uniform system of accounting which would virtually involve the determination of the socially-necessary labor entering into the production of a commodity, the administration has been forced to abandon this ambitious undertaking and to adopt a “blanket” code. The other codes being adopted imitate the generalities of this blanket code.

No, this is no planned economy; such an economy can only be set in motion by the proletariat who alone can see to it that not the workers exist for production but production for the workers, who alone can produce for use and not for profit.
 
The relation of NRA to inflation is worthy of closer attention than is here possible. Government inflation has become a necessity for the bourgeoisie as a class. NRA is one of the ways of preparing for the later stages of inflation and is itself, thru the price-fixing provision, an attempt to “control” the course of the “inevitable” inflation.
 

Aims of the Communists
Not alone does the Communist expose the real nature of this bourgeois attack on the working class, but he participates in all the immediate struggles of the workers – whether for higher wages, better conditions, the right to strike, the rights of unionism for the rights of the worker to democratic justice, etc. – for the purpose of guiding the immediate aims of the struggle so that they coincide with the interests of the class as a whole, and also for the purpose of gaining the confidence of the proletarians through correctness of policy, and through struggle as to make the worker politically conscious in his resistance to the ruling class.
Lenin states that “the workers can acquire political consciousness only from without, only outside of the economic struggle, outside of the sphere of relations between workers and employers.” Hence our task
“is not merely to serve the labor movement at each of its separate stages, but to represent the movement as a whole, to point out to this movement its ultimate aims and its political basis, and to protect its political and ideological independence. Isolated from Social Democracy (read Communism) the labor movement becomes petty and inevitably becomes bourgeois: in conducting only the economic struggle the working class loses its political independence; it becomes the tail of other parties and runs counter to the great slogan: ‘The emancipation of the workers must be the task of the workers themselves.’ – To facilitate the political development and the political organization of the working class is our principal and fundamental task. Those who push this task into the background, who refuse to subordinate to it all the special tasks and methods of the struggle, are straying on to the wrong path and cause serious harm to the movement”.
The writer is well aware that Lenin used the terms “economic” and “political” above in the narrow, restricted sense in which they are counterposed to each other. In the broader sense of the term, “politics” is concentrated economics so that to the Communist every social problem the economic included, is a political problem. Nevertheless the narrower interpretations aid in applying a corrective to policies not sufficiently all-embracing.
 
Function of Intermediate Slogans
At each stage of development it becomes the task of the Communist to search for that particular and precise intermediate slogan which will perform best the service first of being of actual benefit to the workers if achieved; secondly, which will aid in rallying the workers for resistance to the ruling-class solution and in favor of its own solution to a serious social problem, in this case the problem of the crisis; thirdly, that will lead the workers along the path of class struggle towards our final goal of the seizure of power. Is there such a slogan that presents itself at this time in any given industries? I believe there is but a few words are necessary before stating it in its general terms first.
The Communist must be quite clear as to what constitutes progressive development of economic forces. For example, no Communist can be opposed to the process of trustification. On the contrary we look upon this process as inevitable. What we do oppose is bourgeois control of the vast power embodied in highly concentrated industry, and we propose to substitute our own class content in place of the capitalist class content of trusts. In similar fashion we are not opposed to unions, but we are opposed to company unions; that is, to unions permeated by capitalist influence. No institution or social instrument is sacrosanct to the working class on this very account. Thus in the struggle for power Soviets arise. If these Soviets are captured by the bourgeoisie so that they become ruling-class instruments we stand opposed to them. Thus too we are against capitalist trusts, with the emphasis on capitalist. We assume no responsibility for the bourgeois mode of concentrating industry, but we intervene at all stages of the process to advance the working class movement along the path of revolutionary struggle.
 
The Slogan of Nationalization, for “Ripened” Industries
Speaking still in the narrow but perfectly clear sense of the terms, it is rare that an economic struggle presents itself at the same time as clearly a political struggle involving the government and the state. It takes enormous labor on the part of the Communist to transform the ordinary economic struggle of the workers into a political struggle. In the case of the NRA the government has been forced to take the initiative and has thereby presented us with a problem which is at the same time economic and political, involving state power. How can we take advantage of this fact? On the whole the workers incline to accept the pretences of the ruling-class, the demagogy of Roosevelt that he actually desires to so organize the industries as to put the workers back on the job, and to increase their ability to buy goods. These illusions can be destroyed only by engaging the workers in a struggle which will put decisive tests and give decisive answers, which will call the bluff of Roosevelt. Why not have the coal miners demand the nationalization of the mines, and the railroad workers that of the railroads? In the eyes of the workers could not the government then put the workers back to work at once? And why should not the workers participate in the control of production and in the administration of the industry? The problem of nationalization cannot of course be “imposed” on any industry at all from without. It must link up with the concrete fighting slogans and arise as a working class demand along with and from these narrower slogans. With this in view we will attempt to show the applicability of the slogan of nationalization to mining and the railroads in later articles.
(To be continued)
 



The film, Alone, produced by Sovkino of the U.S.S.R. and shown at present at the Cameo Theatre, is a significant portrayal of life in Soviet Russia, not in the heroic days of the Revolution, but at the present time, in the days of struggle against the kulaks and nepmen. Briefly told the story depicts the bleak but enlightening experience of an immature girl just out of Normal School who is sent most unwillingly to teach the children of a backward tribe away off at the edge of civilization in the Altai region of Siberia.
Here a village Soviet exists but we are made quickly and convincingly aware that although forms have changed, the underlying reality has not. The rich kulak who has divided his large flock of sheep forming the wealth of this region, among his “poor relatives” (the usual action), still wields the power. He uses the very Soviet to exploit the worker-shepherds, helped along by the lazy and inefficient bureaucrat assigned as head of the Soviet.
The young Moscow girl, at first bewildered through lack of experience, comes soon to a realization of actualities, particularly when the nepman-kulak invades the class-room to withdraw the older children to make them tend the flock. She comes into conflict with the crafty kulak and when he attempts to slaughter the sheep, the main source of food supply for the village, for his own private profit, her appeal to the head of the Soviet being unavailing, since he has no “instructions”, she decides to appeal to the higher-ups at the provincial center. Here she makes the mistake of accepting the help of the class-enemy who offers to drive her in his sleigh and she finds herself deserted, alone, in the trackless waste of snow. However she is found and against the opposition of the bureaucrat the village poor sent an appeal for help to save her life. An aeroplane does the rest. Meantime the village poor are aroused and force the regeneration of the Soviet by holding elections and casting out the bureaucrat.
We are informed that this picture of conditions as they now exist kindled a heated discussion in Moscow. Criticism was levelled at the playing up of a “star” as against the picturing of the “masses”. Nevertheless, after the usual preview before selected workers to decide whether the film should be released to the Russian masses, these workers voted favorably on it as giving a true picture. In spite of which, the Cameo billboards repeat an announcement that this picture will probably never be seen publicly in Russia.
May we not conclude that the criticism as to “star” technique is just a wee bit disingenuous? That actually the bureaucrats felt more than uncomfortable under its too direct exposure of how, although they are not counter-revolutionaries, they play directly into the hands of the class enemies?
Yes, aimed at bureaucracy in Siberia, it struck home in Moscow as the workers could not fail to understand. No, the film must not be allowed to give aid and comfort to the Left Opposition! It is too symbolic of our own struggle for the regeneration of the Soviets. We heartily recommend the film to party comrades.
 



Commercial Rivalries
China forms the battleground of the nations and exposes the utterly hopeless contradictions of imperialism. Even back in 1908 U.S. Special Agent Clark, sent to Manchuria, reported: “Manchuria is a very important market for American flour, oil, tobacco, etc., and especially for American piece goods. It is the only section of China in which American piece goods practically monopolize the market ... The trade of Manchuria is of more importance to the U.S. than to any other nation, with the possible exception of Japan.” It was the successful Japanese methods of closing this trade to the U.S. that led to the Hays formulation of the Open Door policy, a policy consistently accepted in words by Japan and broken in deed by the methods of railway rebates to Japanese business, by the prompt delivery of Japanese goods and the holding up of foreign goods, by the forgery of trade marks, – in fact all the methods taught by capitalism. The foreigners pay full duties on goods entering Manchuria, the Japs evade these duties. It was fundamentally this conflict that led to the “political” outcry against the Japs in the U.S.
 
Pacific Shipping
A deadly conflict is constantly being waged for control of Pacific shipping. Here the low wages of Japanese seamen give Japan an advantage although she is at the peculiar disadvantage of requiring eleven sailors for every eight needed on U.S. ships due to the lower stature of the Japs. Both countries use the shrewdest “catch-as-catch-can” methods in this conflict. Despite all its disadvantages (older and fewer ships) the Japs control the shipping of 80 percent of their own freightage (imports and exports).
 
Controversies with the U.S.
The period from the Russo-Jap War to the present is sown with innumerable seeds of conflict. The ousting of American business from Manchuria raised a storm of obloquy in the press here against all things Japanese. In San Francisco, Japanese children were excluded from the ordinary schools and were forced to attend special schools for Orientals. The Japanese agitation about this matter caused President Roosevelt to send the U.S. fleet into the Pacific for a “tour” of the world (1908). Continued friction over immigration led to the Gentlemen’s Agreement of 1912, the Japs withholding passports from laborers if no exclusion law were passed. But the California alien land law of 1920 and the Supreme Court decision shutting the Japs out of citizenship led up to the exclusion law of 1924.
The conflict over loans and railways in China present a Gordian knot in the economic battle for supremacy in the Far East. Harriman tried to purchase the South Manchurian railway in 1905. This attempt being futile, Knox then tried to “neutralize” Manchuria by making the railways “international”, a move whose only fruit was the secret partitioning of Manchuria between Czarist Russia and Japan. In 1913 came the attempt to grant an international loan to China for the purpose of building a rival railway to the South Manchurian in Shantung. The State Department approved the “consortium” for loans to China in 1919. However, in every case Japan has outmaneuvered the U.S. imperialists in this sphere.
The World War intensified the struggle for mastery. The U.S. opposed the 21 demands and the attempt of Japan to seize the Siberian Maritime Provinces in the 1918–1920 intervention. Owing to American cable and wireless interests, the U.S. opposed the ceding of the Island of Yap to Japan as a “mandate”. American militarism saw with dismay the handing over to Japan of the strategic Caroline and Marshall Islands and there has been constant friction over the secret building of naval bases in these islands. Finally the United States called Japan to order at the Washington Conference in 1921 where Japan was forced to retreat temporarily. At this conference the U.S. forced the abrogation of the Anglo-Jap alliance of 1902 which formed a threat to the U.S., but which had also become embarrassing to England. At the present time Stimson continues the policy of opposition, by refusing to recognize Manchukuo. Here is Tanaka’s view of recent developments:
“The Nine Powers Agreement is exclusively the reflection of the spirit of trade rivalry, England and America wanted, by means of their great wealth, to smash our influence in China. The proposal for the limitation of armaments is merely a means of curtailing our military power and depriving us of the possibility of conquering the huge territory of China.”
 
Chinese Trade
The share of the U.S. in Chinese trade is on the increase. It controlled 17 percent of Chinese imports in 1928, the Japanese controlling 26.4 percent. Japan’s share is also increasing at the expense of England. The struggle of the U.S. against the strengthening of Japan’s influence in China is reflected politically in the alliance with Chiang Kai-Shek. The Americans feel that their strongest ally would be the growth of a unified Chinese bourgeoisie. Aerial developments, radio communication, transport are being furthered rapidly by U.S. capitalism.
 
The Strategy of War
Why has not war resulted long since between Japan and the U.S.? The answer lies in the immense distances involved. So long as Japan controls her inland sea and the open routes to China, she has nothing to fear from the U.S. with its nearest naval base 5,000 miles away. The effective battle radius of modern fleets from their bases is considered to be only 500 miles. Whether aircraft can revolutionize the situation remains a problem of the future. Japanese control of the Caroline and Marshall Islands means a threat to the flank of any invading navy over 2,000 miles of its route by submarines. Only with the help of a capitalist Russia could the U.S. hope to emerge from an impasse in case of war with Japan.
(To be continued)
 



The Agrarian Problem
“The foundation of all highly developed division of labor that is brought about by the exchange of commodities is the cleavage between town and country. We may say that the whole economic history of society is summarized in the development of this cleavage between town and country.” (Marx, Capital) In the development of capitalism this cleavage occurs by the increasing subjection of the system of agriculture to the intensive exploitation of the town industrialists through the capitalist market. The utter hypocrisy of Japanese “planned” economy is revealed in the indescribable living conditions of peasant and worker resulting from the “blind” play of capitalist economic forces.
 
Status of Japanese Farming
Half the population of Japan is still dependent on farming for its livelihood, a proportion equalled only in Italy and Russia. Considering the arable land only the density of population reaches the extreme figure of 1,375 per square mile. Necessarily the land is cultivated by the most intensive methods to feed this over-crowded population. But these methods are still crude hand methods, human labor being the cheapest of all commodities. It has been figured that whereas it requires 2 days of labor for the southern U.S. farmer, with the aid of a team of horses, to grow an acre of rice, the Japanese peasant gives 110 days of labor to this most important crop. Every Japanese peasant uses electric light but the mechanical farming methods of the West make slow headway against the poverty and the cheap labor and, above all, the small size of peasant holding.
When, after the Restoration, the Japanese “enclosures” occured, the feudal lords retained over half of the cultivated land. Today the large landowners own 54 percent of the arable land with their portion ever growing. The “petty owners” of land, forming 70 percent of the rural population, hold 2½ acres on the average. In 1928 only 70,000 families out of 5½ million cultivated more than 12 acres. In its ½ acre per member of each rural family, Japan is worst off of all modern countries.
Just as the tenant system with crop sharing grew out of slavery in the South, so this same system grew out of feudalism in Japan. In the course of the first twenty years of this century, the number of tenant farmers increased by 30 percent. The present crisis accelerates the process at great speed, the area cultivated by tenants is constantly increasing, the tenantry already represents more than 30 percent of the farm workers.
 
Bankrupt Rural Economy
What with the scarcity of land in terms of demand, land rents are extremely high. Tenants are forced to hand over 50 to 60 percent of the crop in kind, a fact which gives complete control of the market to. the capitalist-landowner, permitting him to rig the market with ease against the small farmer. At least 13 percent of the crop goes to pay for fertilizer, the rest being insufficient to support the rural family. To make up the deficit created under these conditions, the farmer is forced to resort to extra work. Two million peasant families engage in the extremely underpaid silkworm industry, thereby doubling their income. They resort also to weaving, spinning, etc., the rural family being the unit of domestic economy, notoriously a sweatshop system. Furthermore to secure a little ready cash the peasant hires out his daughter to the textile mills or even sells her to the city brothels. Nearly half a million persons migrate from country to town each year, half of them women. However, just as in pre-revolutionary Russia, there is a constant migration back to the village. Official statistics show that a quarter of those who return home have tuberculosis, the terrible scourge of modern Japan.
 
Mortgages
The process of land concentration and peasant exploitation occurs here as elsewhere through the mortgaging of the land. The peasantry owes over 2½ billion yen to the banks. As in America during the present crisis, the banks find it more economic, and less fraught with danger, to await “better times” before foreclosing on the bankrupt farmers. The capitalist economic system permits the industrialists to fasten the burden of the crisis on worker and peasant. With the silk market completely shattered, the peasant’s labor goes begging and his conditions of living become indescribable. He eats the food intended for his animals, the seed for planting, the few cattie remaining – and then he starves miserably.
 
The Solution
“The (Japanese) peasantry in its entirety represents an elementary rebellion.” This rebellion manifests itself ordinarily in Japan through tenant unions which fight first of all for rent reduction. These tenant unions grew from 130 in 1917 to 4,065 in 1926 with a membership of 368,000. The tenant unions have the sympathy and support (sometimes the leadership) of the workers’ unions in the cities.
It was his analysis of the revolutionary significance of the Russian peasants that led Lenin to his concept of the role of the proletariat in a democratic agrarian revolt. The peasants can be put at the service of the revolution only by the force that takes over the state power. The seizing of the land and the democratic aspirations of the agrarians can be fulfilled only through the leadership of the proletariat which, however, does not stop short at this goal but establishes the dictatorship of the proletariat for the transition from capitalism to socialism. Starting from these same premises, Trotsky generalized and broadened the ideas involved, ideas primarily applicable to backward countries, and formulated in greater detail and more precisely than previously the idea of permanent revolution, applicable to world economy in such manner that a successful proletarian victory in one country becomes the starting point for the consolidation of proletarian victory in all countries.
 
Japan and Russia
It is a peculiarity of Japanese economy that in no other country has agriculture remained so backward with industry so advanced. Unlike Czarist Russia, Japan has a more powerful capitalist class in close alliance, as yet, with the feudal landed aristocracy. This renders it more difficult for the relatively weak proletariat to assume the leadership and to seize power in a revolution. Nevertheless its role in relation to the peasantry must follow the broad outlines set by the Russian example. It is possible that Japan’s evolution may follow a different course, but only if the vanguard of the working class does not organize into a strong Communist party ready to lead workers and peasants. There are forces at work already to shunt the peasant revolt over to pseudo-Fascist rails. Tachibana, assassin of Premier Inukai, peculiar combination of social revolutionary terrorist turned fascist, reveals clearly the attempts of the military bureaucracy to place itself at the head of any incipient movement of revolt on the part of the peasants so as to render it abortive. The Russian example must be the beacon for our Japanese comrades, showing the way to the only real solution!
 
Feudal Remnants in Capitalism
The appearance of nationwide unemployment during the prolonged crisis in Japanese capitalism marks a distinct turning-point in its development as well as in that of the working class. In 1930 there appeared for the first time in Japan the American type of hobo, symbol of the end of a period of labor shortage in industry and the beginning of the new epoch of permanent unemployment for an increasing section of the proletariat. Japan’s rising labor costs, in the face of low labor productivity, act increasingly to force rationalization, – in essence the use of more productive machines and less labor. Japan reaches the heights of modernity!
Despite this up-to-dateness the relationship between master and man, boss and worker, is permeated with feudal remnants in unique fashion. Prior to the present crisis, despite the extreme poverty of the villages, the peasantry avoided factory labor, thus creating a continual shortage of industrial workers. The employers were forced to send recruiting agents to the farms, these agents luring young girls to the city by glowing accounts of city life, presents, payment of badly needed cash in advance to the parents and advance of transportation money. Every year 200,000 girls were thus lured to the textile mills, there to be kept behind locked gates in factory dormitories.
Over eight percent of the textile workers are women. The present Japanese factory laws permit children of 12 to work in factories and there are over a quarter of a million girls from 12 to 16 at work. The exploitation of these women and children can be duplicated only by England in the early 19th century. Half the factories have dormitories which “imprison” 1/5 of the men and over half of the women hands. The factory act permits a nominal workday of 11 hours for women and children but this is honored only in the breach. The dormitory permits the prolonging of the work-day with ease. The dormitories are also the breeding-place of prostitution fostered by the bosses. The food provided by the companies at a “nominal sum” (in reality part of the low wages) means slow starvation for the victims. Japanese workers do not sleep in beds but on mats, covered by quilts. A mat occupies a space three feet by six, this space being allotted in the dormitories to two or three workers. Overcrowding, poor food, bad sanitation, confinement – no wonder tuberculosis is the scourge of Japan! All unions make the demand that the dormitories be abolished or, more immediately, that food and sanitary conditions be improved.
Not only in the dormitories is there overcrowding. It is common for two families, each of five persons, with boarders as well, to occupy three mats in workers’ homes. The infant mortality rate among workers’ families is extremely high. Mothers, after long hours of toil, cannot nurse their babies. Here we have the “normal” conditions under Japanese “planned” economy.
 
Wages and Discharge Allowances
The wages of men in the silk-reeling and cotton spinning mills average from 1.20 to 1.60 yen a day, women receiving 0.90 to 1.00 yen per day. This meagre wage is augmented by bonuses (deferred wages) granted at the pleasure of the boss and constituting an excellent means of defrauding workers. However, the remnants of feudal psychology have, up till recently, led to a recognition of the duty of the employer to continue the worker in employment. Thus if a worker is discharged he is granted an allowance amounting to a considerable sum in many cases. Not only does this apply in case of discharge but even in strikes the bosses are obliged to pay the returning strikers for the time lost. In the famous Noda Shoyn Brewing Co. strike lasting for 217 days in 1927–28, the strike was lost but the company paid $100,000 to the strikers dismissed, each one receiving over $200 and, despite the company’s refusal to recognize the union, $40,000 going to the strike fund. Latterly these allowances have become a cheap means of avoiding any unemployment dole.
(To be continued)
 



(Continued from last issue)
The absolute and continuous control of governmental power by the military oligarchy, and the geographic position occupied by Japan in the backward East, have permitted unhampered sway to the policy of Japanese imperialism. This policy presents an intense singleness of purpose throughout the era of capitalist economy. The latent conflict between capitalists and feudal landed aristocracy (that might have “disturbed” Japan) for ultimate supremacy, long since liquidated in the more advanced capitalist countries in favor of industrialism, has not yet reached the point of open conflict, although the economic bases for this conflict are already present (high land rent and dear food as against the capitalist need of cheap labor). Hence the ruling classes act in complete harmony in foreign policy; government, banks, industrialists, business men give their fullest cooperation in the process of expansion and penetration, “peaceful” or militant.
 
The Tanaka Document
The ultimate aims and the methods of the expansionist policy are given singularly candid if not laudable expression in the notorious Tanaka document. These aims, like those of the other imperialist powers, are based on the need for markets, for sources of raw material, and on military considerations of defense and offense. For military purposes Japan is completely dependent on keeping the road to China open as she depends on China for foodstuffs, oil, coal, iron and steel. Modern warfare is fought in the factories at home, a fact emphasized by the statistics of the last years of the campaign on the Western Front when one ton of ammunition was spent for every German destroyed or permanently disabled. Japanese militarism feels lost without a firm base in China. Furthermore Japan exports 30 p.c. of her entire production of manufactured goods, six times the percentage exported by the U.S. Says Tanaka:
“When we remember that the Chinese are our only purchasers, we must fear that day when China unites and her industry begins to flourish – We must from now onwards pursue our own military ends and seize the heart of Manchuria and Mongolia by divers ways, in order to be able on the one hand to destroy the military, political and economical development of China ——–.”
 
The Formula of Conquest
The Japanese rulers learned more quickly than anything else from the West the cunning methods of imperialism. A generation after the forcing of extraterritoriality on Japan by the Powers, she in turn, even while protesting against this same extra-territoriality at home, forced Korea to grant extra-territoriality to the Jap. The Japs protest violently against the closing of the door to Jap immigration by the U.S. in 1924, but Japan has consistently shut out the Chinese from free entry to Japan for exactly the same reason avowed by U.S. capitalism, protection of the standard of living. But above all Japan learned the formula of imperialist expansion in backward regions. In 1875 France “recognized’’ the independence of Annam from China. Following this in the same year Japan granted Korea “recognition”. In both cases China refused to grant such recognition but she was coerced into acceptance of the faits accomplis in 1885 when Annam became a “protectorate” and Korea became “neutral” due to Russian opposition to Japan. In 1903 Baron Komura, Minister for Foreign Affairs, warned Czarist Russia in a secret note: “The unconditional and permanent occupation of Manchuria by Russia would create a state of things prejudicial to the security and interests of Japan ... if Russia were established on the flank of Korea, it would be a constant menace to the separate existence of that empire, or at least would make Russia the dominant power in Korea. Korea is an important outpost in Japan’s line of defense.” In the Russo-Japanese War that followed this warning, Japan established complete hegemony over the Sea of Japan, making it an inland sea, impregnable from attack by sea.
The military oligarchy has learned at home how to control government through a puppet emperor and this same method has become the formula of Japanese imperialism. In Korea the Crown Prince of Korea became the puppet with actual powers in the hands of an “adviser”, or governor-general. Complete control of finance, foreign affairs, concessions and foreign commerce was taken over by the Japs. Diplomatic matters were transferred completely to Tokyo, pressure being successfully applied to cause the withdrawal from Seoul of the various ministers, the first to go being that of the U.S. In 1910 Korea was finally annexed formally to Japan. Precisely the same formula is now being applied to Manchuria.
 
Japan and China
Japan’s aggressions in China followed a plan based on recognition that China cannot be subdued and forced into colonial status simply by military conquest. The plan had the twofold aim of securing control of China’s trade outlets and of gradually seizing the strategic cities and the railroads for final military conquest. Japan everywhere placed herself between the ports seized by the Europeans and the ocean, so as to “starve” these ports ... In 1915 Japan presented the infamous 21 demands to China, great emphasis being placed in these demands on control of railroads. Among the secret clauses of the 21 demands, meant to place China in the early position of Korea, were that the Chinese government should employ “influential Jap advisers” in political, financial and military affairs; that Japanese hospitals, temples and schools in China should be granted the right to own land (no foreigner is allowed to own land in Japan except through a Japanese corporation); that the police departments of various cities be “jointly” administered with Japs; that China must purchase 50 p.c. of her munitions from a Japanese arsenal to be established in China; that Japan be given first right to make all loans. In 1918 Premier Terauchi proposed that China issue gold notes on the strength of gold held in Japan. The Japanese aim in all her relations with China is clear: to make China her colony, to hinder Chinese development until she does fall into the hands of Japanese militarism.
Meantime Japan encroaches on the material resources she requires in China, particularly the coal and iron mines. By a loan made in 1899 to the Hanyang Iron Works, Japan obtained payment in ore from Tayeh on the Yangtze and coal from Pinghsiang. This arrangement, involving practically the entire output of these mines, has been a constant source of conflict due to Japan’s use of it to hinder the growth of the Hanyeh Ping Co. In January 1928 the Japs prevented the Nationalists from seizing this company. Again in 1929 Hupeh Province was forced to relinquish this company, one of the largest iron and steel companies in China.
Japan has over one and one quarter billion dollars invested in Chinese railroads, warehouses, banks, spinning and weaving plants, mining companies. This investment is used for imperialist purposes, but it is at the same time the effort of Japanese capitalists to utilize the cheaper Chinese labor, the nearness to raw materials, the closeness to the market, and the avoidance of Chinese tariffs.
 



Japan in Manchuria
Manchuria is twice the size of Japan proper but it has one-half the population. In resources it resembles closely Canada with its wide prairies, suitable for the growing of wheat and other grains. Only one-half the arable land of Manchuria is under cultivation and yet Manchuria is already the great food granary of the East. Its cattle, timber, minerals are vastly important to Japan’s economy. For this reason 77 p.c. of the total Japanese capital invested in China, is invested in Manchuria. The South Manchuria Railway and its allied concerns absorb 54 p.c. of the Manchurian investment. Its control of the economic life of Manchuria is undisputed.
In any conflict between Japan and any other power—the U.S. or Soviet Russia—Manchuria and its control would prove vital to Japanese defense. But it is also the base for further Japanese aggression. Once her power in Manchuria is consolidated, she would then penetrate into Inner and Outer Mongolia, and into the Far Eastern regions of the U.S.S.R. With utmost care, the Japanese generals are preparing for the conflict they see as inevitable with Soviet Russia. They have utilized the present crisis, when America and England are occupied with their internal woes, and when the Soviet Union is completely absorbed in its Five Year Plan, to take the first preparatory steps. Not an unimportant part was played in their decision by the growing Chinese immigration to Manchuria. In his 1927 document Premier Tanaka stated:
“The number of Chinese grows so rapidly in South Manchuria that our political and economic interests sustain losses. We are compelled in the circumstances to lake aggressive measures in North Manchuria in order to safeguard our prosperity in the future. But if the Chinese-Eastern Railway, belonging to Soviet Russia, develops in this district, then our new continental policy will receive a blow which will inevitably bring about conflict with Soviet Russia in the near future—The Chinese-Eastern Railway will become ours and we shall seize Kirin just as we seized Dairen. It seems that the inevitability of crossing swords with Russia in the fields of Mongolia in order to gain possession of the wealth of North Manchuria is part of our program of national development.”
 
Strategic Railways
Japan’s feverish activities in Manchuria center about the building of three important railways, important strategically and economically. These railways are designed to permit quick concentration of troops in Manchuria as well as effective mobility in warfare. The plans for these roads were made years before the actual invasion of Manchuria. They are designed to undermine economically the Chinese-Eastern railway and to facilitate the immigration of Koreans into Manchuria. How these Koreans are to be used as tools is made abundantly clear by Tanaka:
“If the Koreans come to this district we must offer them financial support through our trust societies and other financial organizations. These organizations must have property rights, and the Koreans will be limited to the right to work upon the land. Formally, however, the Koreans must have property rights ... Thus we shall, unnoticed, gain the control of the best rice plantations which our immigrants, i.e., the Japanese, must receive. They will have to displace the Koreans, who in their turn, will seek new lands which, in the future, will also come into the hands of our people.”
 
What of the Chinese Revolution?
The Japanese can succeed in their blood and iron policy aside from the jealous intervention of the other imperialists, only when the Chinese revolution fails utterly, that is, if the Chinese workers fail to take the power in the near future, leading the peasantry in revolt. The repercussion of such a revolution on the Japanese workers and peasants would, under present conditions, be instantaneous and profound. This problem will require our attention in a later article.
 
Japan and the U.S.
In its policy of imperialist expansion Japan has come into direct conflict time and again with all the other imperialist powers. But particularly is this the case with respect to the U.S. since the Russo-Jap War. Today the question of war between these two imperialist states is openly discussed in the press of the entire world. The problem of imperialist war is frequently posed by Communists in such a manner as to posit a race between the outbreak of this U.S.-Jap war and war against the Soviet Union. The Stalinist method of approaching the problem of defending the Soviet Union, taking into account this imperialist rivalry (properly so!) has led however to such incorrect an dangerous expedients as that of having the U.S. Communist party demonstrate before the Japanese consulates with the demand for expulsion of the Japanese representatives. Such a method of approach is best calculated to mislead the working class.
The population of Japan, static for the two hundred years preceding the Restoration, has doubled during the last sixty-five years. The birth rate of Japan is so extremely high that despite the high death rate there is an annual increase of population of 750,000. Of this number less than 10 percent have been annually absorbed into industry, leaving the remainder to find a place ultimately in an agricultural economy already overburdened under the present system and unable to provide food for the people of Japan. The Japanese government has been forced to approve, tacitly, of measures for birth control and to encourage emigration. Those who emigrate, particularly to Brazil and other South American countries are given 300 yen, providing they agree to renounce their citizenship and not to return to Japan. But these measures have not helped. Nor has there been much of a movement to colonize Manchuria where the climate is too rigorous and the food too different from that to which the Jap is accustomed. The Japs prefer warmer lands where rice is readily grown. Hence their great interest in the 7,000 islands making up the Archipelago of which the Philippines form a part, sparsely populated compared to Japan itself. The Japanese government has designs also on the thousands of islands (five times the area of Japan) in the East Indian Archipelago.
 
The Philippines
These islands, seized by the United States at the same time that China was being threatened with partition among the European power’s in 1898, form the first obstacle to Japan’s “place in the sun”. The islands contain iron ores but no coal, these ores now forming one source of supply for Japan. The United States is interested in exploiting the Philippines for the production of rubber, so as to break the irritating monopoly of the British and Dutch. Furthermore, the Philippines form the outpost for U.S. imperialism in the Far East.
 



Part 1

Part 2

Part 3

Part 4

Part 5

Part 6

Part 7

Part 8

Part 9

Part 10

Part 11

Part 12

Part 13

Part 14
 



When Marx and Engels issued the Communist Manifesto in 1848, Japan was still in its dark ages of feudalism, shut in as a hermit nation to hold back the threatening inundation by the rising tide of world economy. Today we must amplify the first sentence of the Manifesto. Less than a century after its issuance, a scant sixty-four years after the beginning of the modern era in Japan, the spectre of Communism haunts Asia as well as Europe. And in fact the spectre has materialized and taken on flesh and stands with a foot in either continent, so that even as Japan reaches maturity as a world capitalist power, world economy already includes within itself at least the framework of a more advanced stage of society.
Under the direct influence of the “independent reality of world economy”. Japan, the last of the powers to abolish feudalism, has itself become one of the capitalist powers. The unprecedented speed with which this process occurred has been the admiration of those bourgeois writers who attribute the “successes” of Japanese capitalism to the planful foresight of its ruling class. An examination of this planned economy will throw light on the present relation of forces in Japan and will serve to contrast Japanese with Soviet Russian planned economy. A picture of feudal and post-feudal Japan will not come amiss as a starting point.
 
The Feudal Period
When in 1853 Commodore Perry knocked at the gates of Japan with his cannon balls in the Bay of Uraga, ordering them opened in the name of the rapidly expanding American capitalism, he found Japan in the rotten-ripeness of a stagnant feudalism. More than two centuries earlier a new shogun (the Emperor’s chamberlain) had brought to a close the period of perennial warfare between rival military lords struggling for supremacy. His family, the Tokugawas, succeeded in maintaining the “great peace” among the “weltering mass of feudal atoms” until the Emperor’s Restoration in 1868. Simultaneously with the establishment of the Tokugawa shogunate the entire Japanese feudal structure was threatened by the inroads of Portuguese traders and missionaries. The introduction of the cannon and the musket was not the only consequence of the impact with European civilization that aroused the fears of the ruling class for its preservation. One result of the trade with the buccaneer-merchants was the rapid draining of gold from Japan in exchange for silver, the ratio between the two being one to four as against one to sixteen in Europe. Shortly too the silver was in danger of exhaustion as Japan had little to offer in trade except copper. The spread of Christianity disturbed the entire ideational basis of feudalism and when a Portuguese sea captain frankly boasted that the missionaries were merely the advance guard whose function it was to undermine the existing authority so that the Portuguese could step in and rule, the shogun promptly closed the country to all but a limited number of Dutch and Chinese merchants, at the same time decreeing a death penalty for any Jap who tried to leave the country.
 
The Tokugawa Shogunate (1603 to 1868)
The feudal system is essentially a form of military dictatorship over peasants. Its economy is a barter economy and, in the case of Japan, its wealth was reckoned in bushels of rice. Takimoto states in the Economic History of Japan that in the latter part of the Tokugawa era the annual production of rice was 143,322,000 bushels. Of this amount 102,308,000 went to the feudal lords. The Tokugawas assessed a 50% tax on the remainder, leaving 20,476,000 bushels for the peasant producers. The great feudal lords, the heads of great clans, called daimyos numbered 437 at the end of the era. There were 420,000 samurais or military retainers whose families and servants brought the number of non-producers entirely dependent on the lords to well over one million. The entire population numbered 27,000,000, the vast majority peasants.
Despite the intense exploitation of the peasantry, the daimyos, with few exceptions, could not maintain their establishments without deficits met by borrowing from the rising merchant class. Frequently enough the debts were wiped out by the simple expedient of confiscation of the entire wealth of the rich merchant. The samurais were so deeply in debt that general repudiations of debts were common. Thus the shogun declared all debts of samurais null and void in 1716.
Evidently money economy was growing up side by side with the barter economy. The money economy whose beginnings traced back many centuries in Japan, secured a firm hold through foreign trade, although barter continued to exist side by side with it up to 1875 when the system of expressing wealth in terms of bushels of rice was abandoned. In fact trade had not ceased with the decreeing of seclusion. Down to 1700 the Dutch exported from Japan a total of 100,000,000 lbs. of copper. At the end of the 18th century they were still exporting 800,000 lbs. a year and the Chinese were then sending to China from Japan 1½ million lbs. a year. Several “progressive” feudal lords were enriched by engaging in this trade.
 
The Peasants
Terrible as had been the lot of the peasants before the Tokugawa era their sufferings became indescribable during this period. “Even in normal times, the peasants did not have enough to live on. They ate the cheaper grains and potatoes, and very seldom tasted the rice they produced, for it was taken away as tax, and what little was left them had to be sold to get necessary money.” Under feudal economy crop shortages were the most frightful calamity (just as overabundance for the market is the contradictory capitalist calamity). From 1690 to 1840 there were 22 famines, – very destructive of human life. The famines were caused by floods, droughts, frosts, typhoons, volcanoes, insects, – but the suffering was due to the low stage of social organization, a stage in which ease of communication is not desired and roads are made impassable to prevent invasion by neighboring enemies. Desperation often drove the peasants to riot for rice. Fifty such riots are recorded. Five riots of national scope occurred between 1830 and 1846.
Such poverty and misery kept the population stationary throughout this period. It is recorded indeed that during the first decade of the 19th century the peasant population decreased by 1,400,000 due primarily to deaths by starvation, altho a small part of this decrease was due to the fleeing of peasants to the towns. Under such conditions infanticide was so common that in many districts only boys were raised and in others it was the custom to kill 2 out of every 5 babies. Near Nagano the large rock still stands where old women past the age of usefulness were exposed to die.
 
The Restoration
The most powerful rivals of the Tokugawas were the wealthy Choshu and Satsuma clans, both near the seacoast and both of whom had learned more of the arts of the West than any other groups in Japan. Just before the abolition of the feudal system the Satsumas had imported the latest cotton spinning machinery with 6,000 spindles from England, thereby starting the first great industry in Japan. These clans headed a revolt for the overthrow of the decadent Tokugawas and for the restoration of the Emperor, nominal overlord for many centuries, around whom had grown the usual numerous myths of divinity. Unwittingly, Com. Perry, by his “visit” helped these clans end the shogunate.
 
The New Militarist Bureaucracy
Lengthy as this historical outline may appear, it is essential to an intelligent understanding of modern Japan. In the Tokugawa regime, control was exercised by a feudal bureaucracy with the Emperor as a figurehead. With the much-heralded Restoration of the Emperor in change in form but remained exactly the same in essence, as it had to since the ruling class had not changed. The Emperor still remained a figurehead for state religious purposes, the actual power passing over to the new militarists of the successful clans, the Choshu and the Satsuma in particular. The daimyos and the samurais of these clans formed the new bureaucracy that ushered in capitalism under the leadership of feudal lords. Feudalism was abolished but the lords, now peers of the realm, retained most of their land and were compensated by a bond issue for the small part relinquished, and the samurais were granted a state pension as well as a sum of money outright. Feudalism was abolished but military dictatorship remains to this day. To the victors belong the spoils and so from 1868 to 1912 the samurais of the Choshu clan had complete control of the modern conscript army which they organized. Almost invariably the generals have been Choshus. Similarly the Satsumas, who had to play second fiddle because of a premature attempt to invade and annex Korea, [line of text missing] -ern navy. Almost every admiral has been a Satsuma. With minor exceptions these clans contributed between them the membership of that extra-constitutional body, the Genro or Elder Statesmen, who do not give counsel but dictate his policy to the Emperor. True, elements of democracy exist today in Japan but it need only be recalled that the male workers (over 25) were granted the vote only in 1926, exercising this right for the first time in 1928, to realize the role played by the military bureaucracy at the present time. The shadow government hardly conceals the mailed fist. Under the Constitution the Minister of War practically controls the cabinet. By resigning he forces the resignation of the entire cabinet (or parliamentary administrative body) since no cabinet is permitted to function without a Minister of War who must be either a general or an admiral. No general or admiral will consent to become Minister without the consent of his confrères. Per contra the Minister of War need not resign with the rest of the cabinet. In short the military clique form a class apart, “responsible” only to the Emperor, that is, to themselves. These glaring contradictions in Japanese “democracy” became the focus of attention in the invasion of Manchuria and China.
(To be continued)
 



(Continued from last issue)
Rise of Japan, Decline of England
The rise of English capitalism caused the ruin of the handicraft cotton industries of India, China and Japan. But not forever could England guard and keep secret the machines that gave her power. To-day nemesis stalks the British Empire and the East ousts England from her greatest markets for cotton manufactures. Naturally England will use every weapon of resistance to fend off the inevitable, the British Empire will not vanish without gigantic struggles, death-throes one might well call them. The tariff, imperial preference, the capitalist onslaught on wages, particularly in the Lancashire mills, – these are symbols of the decline of British capitalism, of the precarious position she occupies in world markets, of the depletion of her natural resources (coal), of the rising costs of manufacturing. The rise of Japan as a manufacturing nation is an added force tending towards accelerating the decline of English capitalism.
 
The Rhythm of Cotton Technology
The more advanced the technology, the finer the yarns and piece-goods it can produce. The Lancashire mills, the oldest in the world, are still pre-eminent in the making of fine goods, the kind used in the more advanced countries. But the East – India, China, Japan – with its teeming millions, uses coarse yarn and goods, the type first developed by a new technology. The mastery of cotton manufacturing has followed the same rhythm in every country, Japan being quite typical. At first Japan was a market for coarse piece-goods and the heavier, coarser yarns of English make. Gradually the yarns of coarse size were produced at home until they ceased to be imports and became exports. In this stage Japan ousted England from India and China for this type of yarn. Still later the coarse yarn was used in domestic weaving to produce coarse piece-goods which thus became the export. At this stage Japan captured the Asian market outside of India almost completely away from England. Japan encroached rapidly even on the Indian market with the results already outlined, the closing of India to Japan by England. In this process not only has Japan imported greater and greater amounts of raw cotton but latterly she has been importing additional yarn (made in China) for her factories.
 
Limited Possibility for Japanese Growth
The entire development of Japanese capitalism is conditioned by the epoch in which it arose, the era of imperialism. Forced to follow in the wake of the imperialist powers, Japan’s normal growth was stunted. Imperialism signifies the decay of democracy and the militarizing of the imperialist power in its desperate struggle for larger and larger markets. This fact helps to account for the omission of the bourgeois revolution with its democratic phase in Japan’s development and for the ease with which the feudal lords were able to direct Japan’s course. If today, before the achievement of any “real” democracy in Japanese government, we witness movements calling themselves Fascist, the reason is that developments are foreshortened in Japan so that the so-called Fascism, the outgrowth of the military oligarchy, tends to strangle democracy in its very birth.
On the economic field imperialism gives occasion to the peculiar phenomenon of the export of finance capital by Japan to China for the setting-up of cotton mills there even before Japan has saturated her own home market. Practically 40% of all Chinese cotton spindles are owned by Japanese capitalists. In the developments of Chinese and Indian cotton manufacturing, we see however the same fate meted out to Japan that she meted out to England, – the loss of markets. Already China has ousted Japan from her market for the sale of yarns and India already has more spindles than Japan. Japanese capitalism rests on cheaper labor than that of England but both India and China rely on labor still cheaper than that of Japan. A girl spinner in Japan gets 50 to 60 cents for 10 hours of work. A male spinner in India gets from 34 to 43 cents for 10 hours.
Japan’s development in the last 70 years, looked at closely, has been slow rather than fast, much slower than that of England even during its experimental stage. Her home market is not a strong one; for example, in the cotton industry, on the basis of yarn consumed Japan does not produce nearly as much goods as England, the U.S. or even India, and yet Japan exports more cotton cloth than any other country except England, – because she sells less at home due to the lower per capita consumption of her poverty-stricken population. It is a foregone conclusion that Japan will never attain the height of development reached by England in the cotton industry which, nevertheless, is Japan’s greatest industry.
 
“The Big Five”
A striking phenomenon illustrating Japan’s uneven capitalist development under the imperialist forces shaping her institutions, is the growth of tremendous empires of monopoly capitalism side-by-side with her backward industrial forms. The Japanese government has consistently encouraged combinations of capital. During periods of crisis when capitalists find themselves on the verge of bankruptcy, the government intervenes directly to bring about amalgamations and greater monopolistic concentrations of industry, banking, etc. The “Big Five” of Japan are the very heart of Japanese imperialism. They are. banks in the same sense as the National City Bank in the U.S. and the Midland Bank of England; that is to say, they are the sources of finance capital. No big undertaking can be started in Japan without the aid of one or more of these banks. To enumerate the companies controlled by the Mitsui, Mitsubishi, Dai-Ichi, Sumiton and Yasuda banks would be to catalog every great Japanese enterprise. The Mitsui Co. alone controls 25% of the entire export trade of Japan and handles coal, copper, sulphur, lumber, cotton, silk, sugar, etc. It imports ships, locomotives, steel bridges, opium, machine tools, paper pulp. It is the largest owner of coal mines in the East. It handles the millions of tons of the soya bean crop of Manchuria and practically owns the forests of Hokkaido besides having the monopoly of camphor in Formosa. The Mitsubishi Bank controls the shipping industry and all the large shipping companies of Japan. It has vast interests in the engineering industries. It is vitally concerned in the South Manchuria Railroad. These banks, the “Big Five”, are gigantic combines, vertically and horizontally, with tremendous and cynically recognized power in government. Japanese papers refer to a Mitsui cabinet or a Mitsubishi ministry since the Mitsui’s “own” the Seiyuaki Party and the Mitsubishis subsidize the Minseito Party.
 
Effects of the War on Japan
The World War gave Japanese capitalism so tremendous an impetus that it can be said to have reached maturity with this period. The war freed Japan temporarily from the strangling fetters of competition. After a year of painful readjustment, Japanese capitalism seized its opportunity to invade all the markets of the East as well as Africa, the South Sea Islands and Australia. No better measure can be given of the extent of its new trade than the relation of exports to imports. From the Sino-Jap war up to the World War, imports exceeded exports each year, leaving a total excess of imports of 928,803,000 yen at the beginning of the War. The first three years of the War canceled this deficit so that by 1918 there was an actual surplus of exports amounting to 467,000,000 yen.
Before the War England controlled 53% of the imports of cotton piece-goods to China, Japan sending only 20%. By 1925 Japan had 51% of this business, England only 38%. The present Japanese steel industry is the product of the War. The number of factory workers increased almost half a million from the outbreak of War to Oct. 1917.
Of far greater importance however, are not these figures, but the changed social conditions, the enriching of the few and the utter pauperizing of the masses. The same process of inflation occurred in Japan as elsewhere. Prices doubled, then tripled and went skyrocketing. Wages remained stationary or lagged far behind the rising cost of living. Food became scarce. The profits made by the capitalists were simply enormous. Certain mushroom steel companies, sugar manufacturers, shipping concerns, showed profits ranging from 38 to 120%. While the Narikin, the newly rich, lived riotously, the workers and peasants felt the pangs of hunger gnawing ever more fiercely. A period of growing strikes and tenant outbursts culminated finally in the nation-wide rice riots of 1918.
The post-war period brought an even more severe crisis in Japan than in the other capitalist countries. Once more Japan’s imports exceeded her exports so that the first five post-war years showed a greater deficit than the enormous surplus of the four War years. Unemployment became general and took on unprecedented proportions for the first time in Japan’s history. The mushroom companies of the war period, the over-expanded industries, experienced widespread failures. In 1923 the Great Earthquake added its ghastly burden to the suffering of the masses. On the land the War accelerated the process of concentration of ownership. The number of peasants owning their own land had fallen by 38,000 during the six years before the War but in the five years following the War this class decreased by 450,000.
(To be continued)
 



(Continued from last issue)
China at that period was completely self-sustaining. The Chinese were skilled handicraftsmen whose labor was so cheap that it was impossible to undersell her goods in her own market. China practised both silk and cotton weaving so that no cotton goods could be sold in the Far East by Europeans. The English tried to sell their most important manufacture, woolen goods, but this was a drug on the market.
 
The Smuggling of Opium
There was only one commodity that the English found they could sell in China – opium! Opium was grown extensively in India where it was used as a drink, but was little known in China. The English mixed the opium with tobacco brought from America and planted in Formosa. The Chinese learned to smoke this mixture, and then opium alone. As soon as its effects became known in China, its importation was strictly prohibited under penalty of death. But the Europeans, particularly the British, started, to smuggle it in using even the British Navy for this purpose. The traffic assumed such tremendous proportions that it literally drained the gold and silver out of China, gold and silver that the British traders used to pay for Indian cotton of which they imported one million lbs. a year by 1700 and 50 million by 1800.
So appallingly great became the illicit opium traffic – in time – that in sheer desperation the corrupt Chinese officials were driven to action. Around 1840 they seized a large number of chests of opium brought in by the English, and destroyed them. This was quickly seized upon by imperialist England as a good pretext for declaring war on China (the Opium Wars of the 1840s). China was forced to permit opium in and at the same time England was given a foothold in the Yangtse Valley at Hongkong.
Queerly enough, however, the British need for opium in China had ceased at the very time China was being coerced into its acceptance. The reason for this change must be sought in the industrial revolution. The cotton industry had given a great impetus to factory development and this in turn stimulated English mechanical inventions. In 1785 for the first time steam engines were used in factories. The spinning-mule and the power loom had come into existence. England was transformed from a country that imported cotton goods in 1700 to one that exported to the extent of over one million pounds sterling by 1800. Her exports went mostly to her colonies, – but now she could even undersell cheap Chinese labor due to the superior productivity of the machines. Hence opium was no longer needed to finance the purchase of raw materials.
Under the driving-force of profits, however, the opium traffic could not be stopped. It had now invaded China in the form of poppy-growing, the mercenary Chinese officials encouraging this under the pretext that it would help keep Chinese money at home.
 
Japan and Opium
History has repeated itself after a fashion. Today Japan seeks to finance her purchases of raw cotton from abroad. One of the means used to accomplish this, is the sale of opium and of manufactured narcotics to China. Manchuria has always been a base for this traffic. The Japanese, in ousting Chang-Hsiao-liang, have taken over his control of opium. But it is no longer merely raw opium but the cheaper manufactured narcotics, morphine and heroin. These are supplied by the “advanced” capitalist countries, the U.S., England, Germany, Switzerland to China via Japan. The privileged consular pouches and parcels post system of Japan in Manchuria, are freely used for this purpose.
The League of Nations in typical fashion, has convened bodies of “experts” to help “solve” the opium problem. Soviet Russia, invited to these fake conferences, replied: “The government of the U.S.S.R. has come to the conclusion that in connection with the task of fighting the spread of opium and other drugs, the various states are striving to satisfy their own commercial interests and gain material benefits. Under such circumstances, Soviet Russia considers that its participation would be useless.” Making a market for opium means “repeats” and how lucrative the business is, may be judged from the estimate that it amounts to some $600,000,000 per year in China! What chance is there that so vast a business will be abolished under capitalism? In 1917 Japan’s imports of morphine from England – intended for China – amounted to 600,000 ounces. The exact revenue derived from opium in India is unknown, a dark secret in the archives of a special revenue department. But it is known to supply 45% of the revenue in Straits Settlement, 21% in French Indo-China, 11% in the Dutch East Indies, 23% in Siam, 12 to 50% in Persia. The British government grants loans to farmers without interest to raise poppy, the government buying the entire crop. The price of poppy is regulated to spread the poppy acreage as against the competing crop – wheat! It is a foregone conclusion that capitalism will not solve this problem which will be liquidated only after the proletarian revolution and the elimination of the profit motive.
 
Cotton and the Swadeshi Movement
The industrial revolution not only permitted the English to undersell the Chinese but also the Hindus whose handicraft industry practically disappeared as a result. Gandhi, put forth by the Swadeshi movement to win over and mislead the Hindu masses, interprets the modern Swadeshi movement in terms of reestablishing this vanished art. Only the most gullible individual could swallow this pretense. The Swadeshi movement is the bid of the Indian national bourgeoisie for an alliance with the British imperialists in the exploitation of the Hindu workers – particularly in the newly rising cotton mills. All that the Indian bourgeoisie desire is a protective tariff to keep out competition until their “infant” industry is strong enough to stand on its own lusty feet (on the backs of the Hindu workers, of course). Back in 1907 Dr. R.B. Gosh, president of the first National Indian Congress, stated: “What reasonable man can doubt that the real strength of the Swadeshi movement is to be found in our national desire to nurse our own industries, which the Government of India, with their free trade principles, are unable to protect by building up a tariff wall?” On the British side at this same time Sir R. Lethbridge (India and Imperial Preference) advocated such a tariff for India – provided it was made to fit into a scheme of Imperial Preference. Under the stress of Japanese and U.S. competition, England has been forced to adopt exactly this policy advocated for 25 years. The Indian trade is the mainstay of the British cotton industry. To hold this trade and shut the door to all others has been the consistent policy of British capitalism. In their present desperation, Lancashire capitalists are trying to reduce costs by lowering the standards of living of English textile workers, so as to compete with Japan and America. Great Britain’s monopoly of the piece goods trade in India is under threat. Both U.S. and English capitalism are suffering from Japanese competition. The latter’s cotton textile industry has grown faster than any other country’s during the past 15 years. Measured by the amount of raw cotton consumed the industry grew slowly in Great Britain till 1913, then declined. The industry has grown steadily in the U.S. since 1870. In Japan it began during the war and has risen rapidly since.
(To be continued)
 



(Continued from last issue)
It was fortunate for Japan that the Civil War absorbed American energies and that the conquest of India took all of England’s attention after Perry’s demonstration. Japan was faced with the immediate task of providing for the national defense against the encroachment of the imperialists. Without a breathing-spell she could not have withstood further onslaughts. In her weakness the government was forced to sign a humiliating treaty (Towsend-Harris – 1857 with the Tokugawas) with America which granted extra-territoriality to American citizens and which restricted duties on imports to a maximum of 5% ad valorem, creating an open market as the high tariff American government knew. This same treaty had to be granted to the other powers after the demolition of the batteries of Shimonoseki Straits in 1864 by the combined fleets of England, Holland, France and America as punishment for the damaging of some vessels trying to pass through the forbidden straits. The shogun wrote at this time: “These foreigners are no longer to be despised. The art of navigation, steam vessels, and naval and military preparations have found full development in their hands. A war with them might result in temporary victories on our part but when our country would be beset by their combined armaments the whole land would be involved in consequences which we can divine from China’s experience.” The Japs were fearful, observing that the Philippine Islands had been in Spain’s hands for 300 years; Java had come under Dutch influence in 1705 and under her complete control in 1830; the dismemberment of China had begun in 1577 with the Portuguese at Macao; only recently in 1840 the British, had taken Hongkong as a result of the Opium War; the French were already in Indo-China.
Modern military defense was unthinkable without advanced industrial development modelled on Western lines. The feudal system with its low estimation of the merchant class, with its sumptuary laws defining narrowly the very food and clothing of the exploited, with its lack of accumulations from an economy at the bare subsistence level, with its complete lack of technological training for the use machinery – all this left the burden completely on the shoulders of the new bureaucracy. To begin a strenuous period of industrial development, only the government could provide the necessary funds. The government had to take the initiative in deciding, what industries to begin, how to encourage scientific and technical training.
 
Foreign Aid
Whatever similarities exist between the haphazard Japanese program and the planned Soviet program of industrialization (despite its serious errors) can be observed in the immediate inviting of foreign experts to construct and start new plants and to train workers. During the years 1854 to 1859 the lord of Mito had already invited 22 Dutch experts to establish shipyards and to teach the latest arts of shipbuilding. The new government took this enterprise over. It invited British engineers to build the first railroads; British workmen were invited to assist in the erection and operation of the early iron works; British teachers taught glass-making in Tokio; American and British engineers introduced modern mining methods and the use of explosives; French and Italian experts westernized the silk industry; Swiss taught the hemp-braid industry; Germans introduced brewing, the smelting of zinc, the making of steel and the chemical industries; French and Germans started dye making. By 1872 there were 300 foreigners in government departments acting as experts. The Americans contributed little due to their own “infancy” so that today Japanese industry is more European than American. Just as in Soviet Russia, the dependence on foreign experts was not completely successful. The Japs were often imposed upon, some experts were bluffers and other out-and-out frauds (as with the beginning of Stalingrad).
The government thus took the place of the entrepreneur in establishing the first arsenals, the first silk filature, the first glass factory, the first chemical works. It has operated porcelain works, silk and cotton spinning mills, linen factories, cement and brick plants, plants for soap making, type-founding, paint making, food factories, iron and steel plants. There are few industries that do not owe their existence to government initiative.
 
The Feudo-Capitalist Alliance
And yet by 1880 most of the government-owned plants were in private hands! For the government took the unique step of handing these finished plants over to individuals – without the slightest compensation in the vast majority of cases! The meaning and results of this transaction must be clearly stated. That there was nothing queer to Japs in this handing over of wealth to the few, is due to the left-over feudal psychology and to the fact of control by feudal lords. The “lord” could hand over a “fief” to anyone he chose, usually for personal loyalty, and almost always to previous samurai subordinates. That is exactly what occurred. Every member of the Genro, every premier selected by the Genro, has had his particular protegé whom he has enriched. Iwasaki (Working Forces in Japanese Politics) says: “The way to get rich was to become the friend of some high officers of the government.” Thus Marquis Inouye befriended the Matsuis, one of the “big five” capitalist families of modern Japan. Okuma helped the Iwasakis, the present steamship kings. Baron Goto, while Governor of Formosa, made the Suzukis the sugar kings, the same Suzukis who profited most during the world war by selling munitions. The alliance between the feudal lords and the new capitalists has been very firmly cemented indeed. This is of utmost significance for the future agrarian democratic revolution. It need hardly be said that in war the militarists experienced not the slightest resistance on the part of the capitalists to the complete mobilization of industry for military purposes.
The close and direct relationship between capitalist industry and the government is one of the peculiarities of Japanese economy. Up to 1899 the “unequal” treaties of the Powers with Japan remained in force, preventing the raising of tariff barriers to protect infant industries. But every other device to encourage industry and to enrich the capitalists was resorted to by the government. Thus, tax exemptions have been frequently granted, duty remissions are made practically on request, subsides were and still are common and since 1899 the tariff has been an important weapon of defense and offense. Apart from the world war period the shipping industry could not have existed for a single year without large subsidies amounting to enough to cover a substantial slice of the operating expenses plus a large profit to the shipping interests. The main line railways were nationalized at the time of the Russo-Jap war, but there are a number of private branch lines whose profit is guaranteed by the government. Loans are readily granted to new enterprises with very little hope of their return. Contributions from the national treasury to private industry in 1928–9 amounted to 21.9% of the total budget. Under the conditions of industrial growth the government itself has never been able to discontinue entirely its own operation of industrial enterprises, as is evident from the fact that in 1928 there were as many as 371 government factories employing 136,000 workers.
 
Industrial Handicaps and Japanese Imperialism
World economy stimulated the growth of industrial Japan, – but that same world economy now holds Japan as in a vise, tending to strangle her capitalism. And it can be said with utmost confidence that Japan will find no real solution to her life-and-death problems under the world hegemony of capitalism. Imperialism attempts to overcome these handicaps with a sword but is doomed to failure. Japan’s part in the international division of labor will be decided by her workers and peasants, not by domestic and foreign capitalists.
There are three great handicaps that condition Japanese industrial growth. These are: (1) money stringency; (2) poverty in raw materials; (3) need for stable markets.
 
(1) Money stringency and the financing of industry.
The growth of industry demands larger and larger amounts of fluid capital. Quite poor in metallic and mineral resources, Japan has been forced continuously to import both gold and silver for the coining of money, as domestic production scarcely meets industrial and art purposes. It was possible for Japan to establish a more or less stable financial and banking system only with the aid of the 200,000,000 taels indemnity squeezed out of China after the Sino-Jap war. Throughout the modern era Japan has been an importer of raw materials and machinery resulting in an unfavorable net balance of trade (except during the world war). If not through spheres of influence, then economically the capitalist powers exploit Japan as a market. To pay for the imported materials Japan has had to make larger loans abroad. Although the total amount of the public debt is smaller than that of any of the powers, the absolute amount and percentage of foreign debt is greater, whereas the domestic debt is smaller than that of any other country.
The money stringency of Japanese capitalism is reflected in the high interest rates. Banks pay around 10% on deposits. The short-term discount rate is over 10% as compared with the 4–5% of Western countries. These rates impose a severe handicap on Japanese industry. Owing to their youth and to the failure to build up adequate surpluses, industrial concerns are under the necessity of borrowing a large part of their working capital. As the high rates are an important element in the cost of production, they are a handicap to Japanese enterprise in meeting foreign competition. Struggle as she may to overcome this difficulty, Japan falls more and more under the influence of American finance capital. The unparalleled dependence of Japanese production on foreign markets makes Japan extremely sensitive to world economic conditions. Since 1920 she has been in the throes of a profound crisis causing her foreign exchange to fall catastrophically. The inflation caused by the tripling of her bank-note emission during and following the war has been aggravated by the heavy demands made on Japanese economy through the Imperialist seizure of Manchuria.
(To be continued)
 



(Continued from last issue)
Present Status of Japanese Manufacturing
In the Western sense of the term, Japan, with all her speed of development, far from being advanced industrially, is still in the handicraft stage. Not more than 10% of her population (workers and their families) depend for their livelihood on the factory system. Small scale industry is still the rule with higher factories the exception. In 1928 the largest number of factories (29,116) employed only from 5 to 9 workers; 2,283 factories employed from 100 to 500 whereas only 537 factories employed 500 workers and over. Three industries have passed entirely beyond the domestic stage and are concentrated in factories or establishments employing more than 500 workers. These are cotton spinning (95%), shipbuilding (91%) and the primary metal industries (73%), the percentages representing the number of workers in the large establishments.
 
The Textile Industries
The textiles industries form the line of least resistance in Japanese development. They require relatively inexpensive plants and light machinery, using little power. Above all they represent an intensive exploitation of cheap labor.
Textiles engage 50% of the factory workers; they represent some 45% of the total value of all manufactures; they absorb 26% of the total capital investment in partnerships and stock companies ; they use 24% of the total power consumed by industry; and finally they form 68.7% of the value of all exports. These figures do not include household production which is extremely important. Thus, silk reeling, the most important industry, employs 395,000 workers in 3,500 filatures (20% of all factory workers) but there are, in addition, 62,000 peasant households engaged in reeling raw silk.
 
The Contract System
Just as in England before the industrial revolution, contracting is resorted to on a vast scale by wholesaler and jobber. Almost every farm household does some weaving as a necessary adjunct to the farm labor. The women, the very old and the very young are used for this work at sweatshop piece rates. Women earn about 30¢ per day – 50¢ if 12 hours). This home-sweatshop system applies to a large number of industries they work steadily all day (more than besides weaving of cotton or silk. Where the articles are complicated they go into a number of separate homes, the final asembling or finishing being done by the entrepreneur in a “factory”. Thus lanterns are made by 6 different families, each one specializing in some part of the work.
Nothing illustrates better the poverty of Japanese agriculture than the willingness of labor to keep alive so parasitic an industry as the production of cocoons for the manufacture of raw silk. 81% of the cost of producing raw silk is due to the cost of the cocoons, produced almost entirely in peasant households. The exacting labor for their production goes almost totally uncharged, the peasant relying on the small sum of money paid him for this “extra” commodity to make up for the losses sustained in farming.
 
Raw Silk in Foreign Trade
Japan does not use her raw silk for manufacturing but exports 88% of it, by value, to the world’s richest market, the U.S. The reason for this lies in the protective tariff set up by the U.S. (amounting in 1930 to about 70% ad valorem) which acts to strangle Japan’s attempts to establish a silk industry. Raw silk forms 40% of the value of all exports so that when “prosperity” gave way to the world economic crisis, Japan was placed in an extremely precarious position, the burden falling most heavily on workers and peasants.
 
The Cotton Industry
At the present time the competition for the cotton piece goods markets among the exporting countries is at the very forefront of the imperialist struggles on the economic field. Cotton cloth is a staple in great demand in densely populated lands with little industrial development. Design and quality are of little importance in the largest markets (China, India) which buy the cheapest goods obtainable. The cost of labor is a vital part (more than ½) of the cost of the finished product, so that Japan, with its lower paid worker’s, has a great advantage over England and the U.S. in competitive markets. Thus England is in danger of being ousted from the Indian market, particularly with the Hindus boycotting British goods. Each year from 1923 to 1929 Japan exported considerably more cotton tissues and yarns to British India than did Great Britain. Similarly, in these years Japan practically controlled the Chinese market. This has had far-reaching results of such tremendous significance for world economy that it is worth digressing into a short history of the cotton industry in general.
 
Cotton and Opium – A Study in Historic Materialism
Although known in ancient times, cotton was virtually discovered for Western Europe by the East India Company in its trade with the Orient. In the latter half of the 16th century the company bought Indian cotton piece goods for England where a large market was created. Soon the enterprising merchants decided to do their own manufacturing and they began to import raw cotton. Expert Hindu weavers were engaged to teach the English workers their art. At the same time cotton seed were carried to the new colony in Virginia (1650) and shortly this colony became a more important source of supply than India.
 
Mercantilism and Money
The early stages of capitalism were marked by a shortage of the money medium which was in great demand. This shortage gave rise to the mercantilist theory of a favorable balance of trade, the exports to be greater than the imports so that money would flow into a country rather than out. In its trade with the East, the India Company was under the constant necessity of shipping large sums of money out of England to pay for its purchases of spices, cotton goods, etc. This raised so loud an outcry from other English merchants that the company’s charter was twice withdrawn and the export of silver coins was forbidden. The India merchants were thus forced to cast about for some means of securing gold and silver elsewhere with which to finance their trade, particularly in cotton. China appeared to be a fabulous source of wealth, with its accumulations of ages.
(To be continued)
 



(Continued from last issue)
I. The Dearth of Raw Materials
Without ample coal and iron reserves no country can aspire to a place of first rank among modern industrial powers. Lacking in adequate home reserves of these essentials, Japanese capitalism is under the imperative necessity of importing them from abroad. In this respect and more generally, Japan ranks with Italy.
 
Influence of Iron Ores
In 1928 Japan produced 8% of the total iron ores she consumed. Of the 92% she imported 11% came from Japanese colonies and the remainder mainly from China and Straits Settlement. The known iron ores of the Far East, including Japan, Korea, Manchuria and China, are so small in quantity that if Japan were to consume these ores at the per capita rate of the U.S. the entire body of ores would be exhausted in 15 year’s. Manchuria has reserves whose metallic content is equal to that of Germany or of Great Britain, but these ores are of such low grade that they are hardly reckoned as ores in the U.S. Large outlays are necessary for the extra operation of preparing them for use since they must first be chemically treated to obtain a higher concentration of metal. Thus no solid metallurgical basis exists for a steel industry of enduring importance. Nevertheless, despite the cost handicap, Japan maintains her steel industry through tax exemptions, high subsidies and protective tariffs, obviously for armament purposes. The government arsenal founded at Yawata in 1900 produces ½ the steel used by industry but operates at a serious loss each year in spite of the high rates charged for the steel products; for example, round steel bars costing $43 to $51 per ton are sold in Germany for $25 to $30. Japanese capitalists submit quite willingly to this handicap to strengthen imperialist militarism which aims first of all to seize those parts of Asia which can supply basic raw materials and food.
 
The Problem of Coal
Measured in terms of coal production, Japanese industry is far from an advanced stage. The output is ½ ton per capita as compared with over 4½ tons for the U. S. and over 5 for the United Kingdom. Even if we include hydro-electric power (converted to tons of coal) Japan’s position is not improved. The coal reserves of all Japan are only 118 tons per capita, less even than those of British India, and far below the 4,070 tons for Great Britain and the 27,500 tons for the U.S. To make matters worse the coal that Japan does possess, while good as bunker coal on ships, is unfit for coking and therefore unfit for steel production. The high cost of coke is a major problem for the Japanese steel industry and renders her competition in this field utterly impossible under present technology. The cost of coke per ton of pig iron in 1927 was $3.25 in the U.S. and $7.50 in Japan. Only in China (with its 2,200 tons per capita reserves) is there coking coal in the Far East and even there not in large amounts.
Coal mining is far more difficult in Japan than in the other capitalist countries as the seams lie much deeper and are thinner. Less machinery being used, the output per miner is less. Thus each miner produced ½ ton per day in 1925 as against 4½ tons for the U.S. Nor is this cost made up by cheaper labor – the output being 1/9 as great but the wages being 1/5 those in the U.S.
 
Textiles
Barred from rapid progress in the heavy industries by her lack of the necessary raw materials, Japanese capitalism has been forced – for other reasons as well – to turn to the lighter textile industries. Yet even here Japan is forced to import cotton, the raw material of greatest importance to her manufacturing. Supplied with an abundance of raw silk, Japan is nevertheless not a great manufacturer of silk but rather a source of raw material for the U.S. silk industry.
It is above all this poverty in raw materials that makes Japan a debtor nation, hyper-sensitive to world market conditions, unstable financially owing to difficulties of international payments.
 
III. The Imperialist Struggle for Markets
Japanese feudal-capitalism entered the world arena even later than German imperialism and her struggle for markets commenced at the very birth of her capitalism, particularly in competition with the powers in China. China and India, with half the world’s population, form a fabulous market. But India is pre-empted by England. More than any other power Japan depends on foreign markets, for no other country exports so large a percentage of the total production of goods. The desperate effort of Japanese imperialism to subjugate China as a colony to function as market and as source of raw material, is the reflection of the stifling action of capitalist world economy on the further growth of Japanese productive forces. But China is also essential to U.S. capitalism and Chinese capitalists desire to exploit the home market themselves. Young as is Japanese capitalism, it has already passed through many crises and has had to limit its productive capacities again and again due to the competition for markets. Japanese capitalism is faced with the task of carving out its own markets by seizing China or by wresting colonies from the established powers. This external struggle manifests the desperate effort of the feudal-capitalist combination to maintain the inner exploitation of the workers and peasants.
(To be continued)
 





“Stop Fooling with Labor”!
The first period of the NRA has definitely ended. The assistance tendered to the A.F. of L. bureaucracy to help them gain control of the newly organized masses of workers so as to prevent the growth of unions under militant leadership, has been withdrawn under the pressure of big business in the mass production industries. With the revival of business, aided by enormous subsidies, finance capital takes new courage and demands complete “freedom” to amass greater profits. It is in no mood to brook the resistance of labor to the extension of capitalist gains at the expense of the workers’ living standards. “Stop fooling with labor,” says Girdler, head of the Republic Steel Co. Away with all this nonsensical pretence of the NRA! Girdler would rather shut down the factories than treat with “professional” unionists. Irvin, President of U.S. Steel, declares for the open shop and company unionism. He is echoed by Grace, head of Bethlehem Steel. Sloan, chief of General Motors, lays down an ultimatum for the open shop and rallies the entire boss class against tiny half-way measures in the most aggressive speech of all:
“We should more effectively and courageously stand and, if necessary, fight for those things which are just and equitable (the open, shop, against unionism, for company unions, against collective bargaining, against government ‘regimentation’ and control, for profits) ...”
* * * *

Finance Capital to the Attack
Big business thus starts a carefully planned and concerted drive against the working class and its independent trade unions. The pretences of increasing wages and raising living standards become too transparent to be of any further service to the ruling class and the struggle begins to take on a more and more open character. To compete in foreign markets against Japanese competition the American capitalists strive desperately to lower costs of production – by lowering wages. To carry out the program of imperialism the bosses must prevent any vast influx into the trade unions and a brake must be set on the workers’ movement towards organization. Ford, Working Class Enemy No. 1, leads the way. Through his spy system he picks out the unionists and concentrates them in a single machine shop. Recently when about two hundred union members came to work with union badges openly displayed, nothing was done at the time, but gradually all were transferred in small groups to the “union” machine shop. Then this shop was shut down and all these workers laid off. No discrimination there! Simply an economy!
* * * *

“Who Is Bigger?”
Distressed by the openness of the attack on the workers and the callous flouting of bourgeois law by the bourgeoisie, the demagogic New York Post asks editorially, “Who is bigger – U.S.A. or U.S. Steel?” Every day makes clear that Roosevelt and Johnson have been given their new line of march by their masters and they obey orders! The NRA labor section is being dismantled as rapidly as possible. The sham of “collective bargaining” has been exposed by the government’s legalizing of the company union and the open shop and its denial of the right of a majority of the workers to represent all the workers in negotiations (an interesting contradiction of bourgeois democracy which reveals the real nature of that democracy). The working class has had enough experience with the Regional and National Labor Boards to understand their function of betrayal. The personnel is sufficient in itself to dispel any illusions concerning these fake “impartial” boards. What Detroit worker would appeal to H.H. Rice, former president of Cadillac and vice-president of General Motors, now head of the Detroit Regional Labor Board? No, there can be no illusion in the mind of workers as to the nature of the government in relation to the working class. The government is carrying out the will of the ruling class. Events are rapidly posing a far different question: who is bigger – the capitalist class or the working class?
* * * *

The Road to Fascism
The Minneapolis and Toledo strikes are the clearest signs that the workers have learned that they must rely on their own strength and organization to defend their livelihood from the attacks of the bosses. But these militant strikes will infuriate the predatory finance capitalists and will drive them to sterner measures. It is in this struggle that the capitalists will decide whether or not to take the road to fascism.
 





Fascism and the Junkers
If Von Hindenburg and Von Papen, the spokesmen for the Junkers, yielded to the upstart Hitler and permitted him to come to power, it was not because of any love for plebeian fascism. The German Junkers swung to fascism in order to save their big landed estates, directly threatened in the course of events by the efforts to solve the agrarian crisis. The barons thus allied themselves with the industrial magnates and the powerful bankers in their mutual effort to save the system of private property. Similarly in Italy the monarchy had swung to Mussolini in order to save the throne along with the capitalist system. But the Junker class, the left-over feudal aristocracy of landowners, never for one instant lost sight of their ultimate aim, – the reestablishment of their own power as the class of professional politicians, ruling with and for the bourgeoisie through the monarchy.
 

Fascism as a Bridge
The Stalinists, with their completely false appraisal of the meaning of fascism, considered it as a bridge to proletarian dictatorship. After Hitler, Thaelmann! And this in short order too. Let Hitler come to power, said Stalin, and then we will follow. With far more justification the Junker-monarchists said,
“Let Hitler come to power – and then, after he has used the petty-bourgeois masses to crush the democracy, to wipe out all workers’ organizations and political parties, we shall crash him in turn and restore the Kaiser.”
And with that contingency ever in view, von Hindenburg, temporary regent for the monarchy, saw to it that the forms of “legality” would be preserved by maintaining a majority of the cabinet of dictators as his henchmen. Just as the big financiers needed Hitler (leader of the petty bourgeoisie) to uproot all the elements of proletarian revolution, so the Junkers needed Hitler to act as the bridge for their restoration to the special status of state bureaucracy.
 

Fascism Losing its Social Base
From the start it was quite evident that the petty bourgeois base of fascism could not endure. The followers of Hitler, misled by catchwords and demagogy, were bound to become rapidly disillusioned. As the social basis on which the Nazis rose to power, gave way and began to disappear, it was also clear that the fascist rulers would be transformed into an ever narrowing bureaucracy, dependent on the police and the military. Von Papen now begins to put to the test the extent of this inevitable process. He is exploring, like a true militarist, the depth of depletion of the reserves of fascism. By drawing the sword and attempting a blow at Goebbels, one wing of Hitler resting on the petty bourgeoisie, von Papen aims to isolate Hitler so that he may be more readily dealt with tomorrow. True the Junkers yielded up till now; true they disbanded (or pretended to do so) their own forces, the Stahlhelm. But the process now begins to reverse itself and Hitler, up till now the mediator in disputes between the opposing wings of the ruling bureaucracy, will have to move closer under the clutches of the monarchists, even while he attempts to renounce them, for he cannot afford now an open breach with these dangerous allies. The former Kaiser, thanking Hitler publicly for his achievements for the reaction, rejoices that events begin to move in his direction. Von Papen, criticizing the Nazis openly for their “excesses”, gives expression simultaneously to the hopes of the monarchists:
“In my opinion”, he said, “the German state will at some future date find its crowning glory in a chief of state who once for all is removed from the political fight of demagogy and from clashes among economic and vocational Interests.”
 

The Big Bourgeoisie
The big bourgeoisie, always alarmed at the possible outcome of civil war, having gained their ends through a dictatorship, are anxious to bring about “law and order” as soon as possible after a victory. The demagogy of fascism, aping socialist phrases to win the tradesmen and the professional classes, never pleased big business. Nor does the attempt by fascism to establish the corporate state appeal to bankers and industrialists. They prefer an alliance, at the earliest possible moment, with a more stable ruling caste. That power In Germany has been traditionally the landed barons, the Junkers. The time for a change may not yet be ripe. Here we merely indicate a trend that is clearly to be seen. The dictatorship of the plebeian fascists, resting on the petty bourgeoisie, tends to become transformed into a military dictatorship. As Engels says:
“It seems a law of historical development that the bourgeoisie can in no European country get hold of political power – at least for any length of time – in the same exclusive way in which the feudal aristocracy kept hold of it during the Middle Ages.”
We are witnessing the workings of this law.
 





The Textile Crisis
Nothing illustrates so well the utter inability of capitalism to lay down plans for production of wide-range character, as does the textile crisis. The need for a sudden drastic cut in production reveals clearly that even a capitalist cartel including all of a given industry, cannot regulate production to consumption. All it can do is to order sharp curtailment when production gets out of control. It cannot avoid crisis, for the present situation is a distinct crisis brought on all the quicker by the capitalist attempt to regulate production. What is happening in the textile industry is a forerunner of what will happen n all the big mass production industries under monopolist control.
* * * *

The Workers and the Forces of Production
The working class can see here too, the meaning of the NRA and the way in which its operation affects their livelihood. When the Cotton Textile Code Authority orders a decrease in production by 25% for three months without any change in hourly wage rates it places the burden of the crisis in this industry immediately on the backs of the proletariat. The NRA is a police club which beats down the forces of production when they threaten profits for the bosses. At the same time this club descends on the heads of the workers, the class that is concerned with and represents the social forces of production. The working class encounter this sort of action more and more in the future. Ultimately they must learn that not capitalist control of production for profits, that workers’ control of production for social use can assure them a livelihood and eliminate starvation. Capitalist control means the sabotage of production, workers’ control means its unlimited expansion for the benefit of the masses. The closed shop is the first step in the direction of workers’ control but its achievement depends on the building of powerful, militant trade unions. Through such unions, casting off the treacherous leadership of the reformists, the textile workers can best reply to the bosses when they put through wage cuts.
* * * *

Company Unionism
For many years Rockefeller has maintained a subsidized strikebreaking agency called the Industrial Relations Counselors, Inc. This agency has the support of Cyrus McCormick (ardent promoter of the company union), A.H. Woods, Owen D. Young, etc. This outfit “gives advice” in matters of “personnel” to all the big industrialists including the steel barons, the oil magnates, the manufacturers of farm machinery, the electrical trust etc. Since 1926 Rockefeller has supplied generous funds to enlighten the boss class on the best methods for trapping the workers in “employee representation plans” or company unions. This organization became especially active in the period following the adoption of the NRA with its 7a fake labor clause. A widespread campaign was conducted through the subsidized technical press, urging the bosses to defeat independent unionism by setting up fake, controlled unions. Thus in Automotive Industries for December 933 we read, in an unsigned article entitled, Organizing a Company Union:
“Shall we, or shall we not, sanction a ‘company union’ in our plant? – If you do not, someone will organize your employees for you. This is not in the least meant to be interpreted as a threat, but is merely a foregone conclusion under current conditions.”
The article then proceeds to outline minutely the best method of going about enticing (and forcing) workers into the boss’ union.
More recently the industrial counselors have been mobilizing their forces wherever the threat of mass strikes arose. Thus the head of the organization, A.H. Young, was thrown into the steel industry as soon as “trouble” threatened there. He is now with the U.S. Steel Co., just as C.J. Hicks is with the Standard Oil Co. of N.J. for the same nefarious purpose.
* * * *

Smash Company Unions!
The company unions are the latest form of “yellow dog” contracts forced on the working class. The drive against the organizing of the workers in real unions has been well planned long in advance and has the support of all the big financiers, from Ford to Swope, Teagle to Rockefeller. Roosevelt merely obeyed the voice of his masters In the Auto Strike when he legalized the company union. The same tactics are being applied now to defeat the steel workers. We must mobilize labor to smash company unionism by militant action! The capitalist government attempts to carry out the strike-breaking program of big business. We must checkmate Roosevelt!
 





Biro-Bidjan
The Soviet Union has granted to Biro-Bidjan the status of an autonomous Soviet Republic for the Jews. This step is consistently in line with the democratic policy established at the very foundation of the Soviets of granting complete self-determination to the oppressed nationalities, and even to small national minorities. Here is a bit of historic justice – that the country once anathematized by the workers of all lands for its violently reactionary instigations and pogroms against the Jews, should now be the first to grant a vast territory to them for their free cultural development. Coming too, at a time of extreme fascist reaction when the capitalist dictatorships of Germany, Austria, Poland, Bulgaria, Rumania, Latvia have taken over Czarist tactics of diverting the pent-up wrath of the masses against the terrible conditions under which they are forced to live, of transforming this as yet unguided anger into a weapon of reaction by making scapegoats of the Jews, – the action of the Soviet Government stands out in bold contrast and will undoubtedly draw the Jewish masses everywhere into closer sympathy with Soviet Russia.
* * * *

Contrast with Palestine
Inevitably the question will pose itself to the many Jews attracted now more than ever to the idea of a homeland – which one, Palestine or Biro-Bidjan? To the Marxist this question can have but one answer. There can be no question of the idealism of the Jewish masses in supporting Palestine and immigrating there. But Palestine carries a double taint, that of capitalist dividing of the working class and that of imperialist intrigue. It is by no accident (at least so far as the bourgeois leaders are concerned) that the Zionists everywhere set themselves apart from the workers’ movement. The sort of national culture desired by Jewish capitalists is reactionary and aims to split off one and not the least important section of the workers from the international movement. True there exists a section of the Zionist movement that carries on a struggle against capitalist influence inside and outside of Palestine. With their struggle against capitalism we are completely in sympathy. But Jewish Palestine remains nevertheless a bit of transported capitalism under the paw of British imperialism. The conflict in which Jewish immigrants immediately find themselves with the Arabs tends to obscure for both the Jewish and the Arab masses the essential need for proletarian unity against the common capitalist oppressors. It permits the semi-feudal Arabian ruling class to gain the support of the Arab masses in a fictitious struggle against British imperialism in the role of expropriating the Arab in favor of the Jew. It permits the Jewish bourgeoisie to foist a fake national unity on their masses by the false plea of common defense.
* * * *

The Question of Freedom
Biro-Bidjan, on the other hand stands as a symbol for all nationalities and for the Jews in particular. No oppressed nationality or national minority – and this can be said categorically – can gain its freedom under capitalist rule. Today only by enlisting in the international class struggle on the side of the proletariat for the complete overthrow of capitalism, for the abolition of private property ana capitalist exploitation, can the oppressed national masses gain their freedom. In every nation there exists, as Lenin pointed out, not one national culture, but two. The dominant culture, that of the present ruling class, is one of robbery at home and abroad, of exploitation and oppression of all kinds, including that of national minorities. The other existing in embryo only in the capitalist countries, is that of proletarian democracy, of international socialism fighting for unity of the oppressed against all separatist barriers of race, color, religion, including the national barriers. The proletariat of each and every land in liberating itself also leads to the liberation of every other section of the oppressed masses.
* * * *

Defense of the Soviet Union
That is the meaning of Biro-Bidjan. Here the Jews are given the opportunity to establish a real homeland devoid of capitalist exploitation and built in cooperation, not merely with each other but with the international proletariat. Let no one assume the task is easy for Biro-Bidjan no more than the rest of the Soviet Union is safe so long as capitalism still exists. But the Jewish masses have an added reason for supporting the workers’ fatherland and defending the Soviet Union.
 





Contraction of the Stalinist Bureaucracy
The more the Stalinist bureaucracy loses its mass support, the more it feels its isolation and divorce from the masses, the greater becomes its contraction into a bureaucratic directory. The process of elimination of all control, even the fictitious control by the left-over apparatus of what was once the powerful Russian Communist party, goes on apace. Nothing could prove more conclusively the utter disintegration of the Russian Party than the cavalier fashion in which the most prized symbols of Soviet power created by the revolutionary Bolsheviks are ushered out of existence.
A stroke of Stalin’s pen is enough to wipe out the Workers and Peasants’ Inspection. Lenin hailed this institution as the means of uprooting the growing bureaucracy which he saw menacing the progress of the proletarian dictatorship. Ironically enough, Stalin placed Ordjanikidze at the head of this organization, formed to eliminate these very Ordjanikidzes. It will be remembered that Lenin had demanded the expulsion of this same Ordjanikidze for his high-handed bureaucracy in the Caucasus. And to think of this man made head of the Control Commission!
Following this blow at the October Revolution there came the elimination by simple decree (there could be no discussion of such vital problems in a dead party) of the once all-powerful G.P.U. The latter institution embodied a force of bureaucrats knowing too much of Stalinist intrigue and methods of dealing with opposition.
 

The Bonapartist Danger
Now comes a still more ominous step in the direction of Thermidor and Bonapartism. This is the abolition of the Peoples’ Commissariat of War (the Revolutionary War Council) and the concentration of power in the hands of Voroshiloff as Supreme Commander of the Red Army. We recall that these same bureaucrats, aiming at this type of uncontrolled Bonapartist power attributed their own design to Comrade Trotsky, creator of the Red Army and organizer of its revolutionary successes. The bureaucracy naturally cloaks its arbitrary acts under the guise of increasing efficiency and individual initiative and responsibility. (And who is to bring this reactionary clique to task for inefficiency, nay for its crimes against the international proletariat and the October Revolution?)
As the danger of imperialist war looms closer and closer the Stalinist bureaucracy entrenches itself ever more firmly. One can see the outlines of a future Directory of Public Safety established for the “efficient” carrying out of Soviet defense. Whether this Directory will consist of its present candidates, – Stalin, Voroshiloff, Molotoff, Kaganowitch, Ordjonikdze – no one can now predict, for developments become rapid during national crises. That the dictatorship of the proletariat that has not yet been liquidated, since the Soviet system still endures, is nevertheless under the gravest danger from the ever contracting bureaucracy, goes without saying.
 

Build New Parties
The fate of the international revolution, which means the fate of the Soviet Union, for the years to come depends on the rallying of the revolutionary vanguard of the world’s working class under the banner of the Fourth International, on the speed with which the new parties of the Fourth International can be constituted. The Russian workers have forgotten their leading role in the world revolution. Stalinist defeats have turned their attention inwards on national problems. Only a new party of Internationalist Communists in the Soviet Union too can guide the Russian masses back on the road of world revolution. Only the new party can prepare for the dangers that He ahead in the further evolution of the proletarian dictatorship in the Soviet Union. The defense of the Soviet Union becomes linked more and more abroad and at home with the construction of the Fourth International.
 

The Infallibility of Stalinism
As this Militant goes to press the Daily Worker comes out with an offer of United Front in the struggle against fascism – with the new executive committee of the Socialist Party. What will become of the infallibility of the Stalinist leadership with such an offer made from organization to organization? Is this a United Front from below or from above? We shall await with interest the outcome of this most belated action. Needless to say, the past of the Stalinist Party here has hardly led up to a ready acceptance of such an offer by anybody. Events will demonstrate whether this is a maneuver to save the party from the type of split that occurred in St. Denis.
 



STARVATION in the midst of plenty, that distinguishing mark of the capitalist system of production, is intensified a hundredfold during a crisis. The tremendous power of organized factory production produces commodities far beyond the possibilities of control by the profit system. The anarchy of overproduction for the market brings about a catastrophic fall in prices, the shutdown of plants, widespread unemployment for the masses of workers, bankruptcies, disruption of world trade, disturbance of the monetary system, the frantic search of capitalists for new outlets and new markets. In the past the bourgeoisie overcame the general crisis by the wholesale destruction not merely of surplus commodities but of machinery and means of production, as well as by conquering new markets and intensifying exploitation of the old.
In the present crisis the old laissez-faire method of recovery no longer suffices. That method worked in the hey-day of “free competition” when capitalism could still expand. The present epoch has witnessed the virtual destruction of free competition, the growth of monopolies, the division of the world market among international capitalist combines. The national capitalist states, taking on a corresponding imperialist structure, have divided the entire earth, with the exception of China, into politically controlled territories for exploitation. Capitalism as a world system has no further way of expanding, all its forces have been developed and it has reached its decline.
The NIRA can be understood only against this world background. Forced reluctantly and despite itself to treat the means of production as social, insofar as this is possible under capitalism, the bourgeoisie has had to permit the government to step in not merely to supplement but to direct recovery and to wield its police powers to salvage the wreck. Behind all the regulations of the “authoritarian” state is the simple program of restoring profits to the capitalists, of pumping new blood into the weakened frame of capitalism. In accomplishing this purpose, the government, as executive committee of the capitalist class, faced the task of halting the seemingly never-ending drop in prices, and of driving down the living standards of the masses of workers and farmers in order to place the national capitalism in a stronger competitive position.
To stabilize industry (which means to render it static and unprogressive), Roosevelt was compelled to follow the inevitable trend toward ever greater concentration of capital. Cartels, resorted to previously by financiers to stop losses due to competition and to bring in maximum profits, are established on a national scale. This truce in industrial warfare ratified by the system of codes permits the regularizing of production schedules, the apportioning of quotas, fixing of prices (under the mediaeval concepts of “fair competition” and “fair price” indicative of decay). Under the codes the control of the cartels is handed over to the tender mercies of big finance capital which acts to concentrate its power still further by squeezing out the little fellows in accordance with the dictum of Proudhon that “Competition is civil war, and monopoly a massacre of the prisoners”.
To start the wheels of industry going, the capitalist government pours rivers of gold in the form of loans, subsidies, orders into the banks and trusts. The state budget takes on undreamed-of proportions. Its balancing becomes ever more precarious and in fact impossible. The national debt increases at a dizzying pace. Taxes become an unbearable burden to the middle class, especially to the debt-ridden farmers – on whom, with the working class, the entire back-breaking load of the crisis is laid – and this at a time when they can least afford to pay. The big bourgeoisie evades and escapes taxation – the Morgans and the Rockefellers pay little or nothing. The problem of obtaining money when hard cash is scarce, the problem of increasing the national debt and yet casting it off, of expropriating the middle class while releasing big finance capital from debt (throwing off of bank deposits, insurance, stocks, and bonds) is solved – presto! – by inflation. The big bankers not only defend themselves but profit anew (note the vast stream of gold that flowed back to America when the dollar was temporarily “stabilized”). Inflation is used to stop the fall of prices and to reverse their trend. It acts as the subtlest means of wage-cutting, for the cut goes into effect over a prolonged period as the inflationary process makes itself felt throughout the price system. Depreciation of the dollar is a powerful way of regaining foreign trade and of meeting the monetary manipulations of Japanese and English capitalism. But inflation is a dangerous weapon to capitalism for it is a cumulative process beyond the control of any single national state, since no one state controls world economy. Instead of stabilizing the national economy, inflation introduces new disturbances and repercussions, each requiring fresh intervention by the state.
The benefits to finance capital of trustified industry depend upon mass production, upon socialized production on a vast scale. The exploited masses at home cannot absorb the tremendous surpluses resulting from this type of production and they must be sold abroad. The fierce competition of expanding imperialist capitalism results, and leads to a combined system of high (protected) prices in the home market and dumping of goods at low prices abroad. This chaotic price structure introduces unbearable stresses and strains into world economy and disrupts foreign exchange. The bourgeoisie, whose first historic act of power was to stabilize the currency, is forced in its decline to introduce all the uncertainties and chaos of “managed” (manipulated) currencies. To preserve the home market for its own national capitalism against dumping, each country sets up high tariff walls, restrictions, import and export quotas, embargoes. This system of “autarchy”, due to “planned” dumping, leads to the almost complete disruption of world economy. American capitalism, hit the hardest by the crisis because of its advanced technique, is preparing the machinery (export banks, tariff power to Roosevelt) to take over imports and exports on a national scale. To what extent these further weapons of state capitalism will be adopted depends on the extent of liquidation of the crisis in the near future. There can be little doubt that the inevitable war, clearly visible just ahead, will inaugurate rigid state control on an unprecedented scale.
The capitalist “planned economy” of the NIRA is totally different from that of the Sovie| Union which has released the forces of production from the fetters of the profit system and permitted them to expand on a grandiose scale. Roosevelt’s method is shot through and through with reaction and exposes to full view the decay of modern capitalism chained within the national boundaries. The NIRA is the organizing of waste, the sabotage of production, the restriction of output – in its ultimate aspect it is the organizing of mass hunger for greater profits. The American farmer, in competition with the backward spots of the earth coveted by US imperialism, is asked to go out of business to the extent that this is safe for capitalism. For a reserve army to be used against the working class in revolt, subsistence peasant farmers are to be created, producing not for a world market but for themselves. The NIRA and the AAA, far from solving the agricultural crisis, intensify it still more. The present world-wide drought aids the program of imperialism for the farmer on the one hand, but on the other unbalances the state budget still further, so that the spectre of unlimited inflation hovers over the entire “recovery” program. The NIRA emphasizes all the disproportions that exist in present American economy, giving greater power than ever to vast monopolist empires over the rest of economy. The Roosevelt program is unreservedly the program of imperialism.
Embodying the same needs for national capitalist salvation that drove Italy and Germany to Fascism (the state system of reactionary imperialism resulting when the workers fail to achieve power through the proletarian revolution), the Roosevelt program nevertheless still operates behind the screen of bourgeois democracy. Whereas the crisis in Germany found a working class disciplined and organized in powerful unions and political parties which could offer organized resistance to the beating down of wages and living standards (a resistance that, under proper Communist leadership, could have resulted without question in the taking of power by the proletarian dictatorship), here the workers are poorly organized and extremely backward politically. Here the bourgeoisie can still rely on the method of democratic illusions to balk and bind the masses and to carry out the will of the ruling class.
Bourgeois democracy is long on promises for mass welfare, short on performance, so that there is an ever recurring contradiction between words and deeds. The organizing of capitalist industry into powerful cartels to deal effectively with labor in revolt is called “self-government in industry”. The vicious capitalist drive to beat down the living standards of the workers is conducted under a barrage of propaganda concerning raising these living standards at the expense of profit. Roosevelt talks of increasing the purchasing power of the masses by raising wages and decreasing unemployment – and then proceeds to have industry adopt the stagger plan which puts the burden of unemployment on the employed workers. With the shortening of hours and the increased hourly rates, the worker finds himself short one week’s wages out of every four. And the boss class saves the difference without more than a pretense of hiring more unemployed. When wages do go up, inflation steps in to drive up the price level much faster than wages with the result that the worker receives less in real wages. Roosevelt is engaged in “spreading the national income” – by emptying the treasury into the pockets of the big financiers (RFC, PWA, etc.). Mouthing the phrases of a “social program”, Roosevelt avoids unemployment insurance and adequate relief (they will be left for that elusive “next session” of Congress) by a system of starvation relief and forced labor camps (CCC). On the international arena the New Dealers, the Brain Trust rationalizers for democratic capitalism, speak of cooperation and disarmament when they mean the sharpest trade war and arming to the teeth. Industry is “regimented” for the next imperialist war; the army liaison officers are at their posts in industry; the contracts for vast war supplies need only a signature to mobilize the factories for instant service to the war machine.
The main illusion fostered by bourgeois democracy is that of the state as being above the classes, as adjusting the “common” interest. Thus in the NIRA program for saving the exploiting class, an apparent concession is also made to the working class. The 7A clause permits them to organize freely and without coercion or interference from the bosses. In actuality this clause, shrouded in ambiguity from the start, served to lull workers into passivity by making them think that the government would “protect” their interests, to harness the newly awakening labor movement to reformism and class collaborationism, to permit the capitalist government to discriminate against militant unionism, and to involve the workers in that fake mixture of obstacles, delays and strike betrayals so aptly called the National Run Around.
The upturn in business, due in large measure to government spending, permitted workers to organize and engage in renewed struggles to regain the conditions they had lost during the crisis. There took place a tremendous influx into the unions, particularly into the AF of L, which has almost as many members now as at any time in its history. But the upturn gave to the big bourgeoisie, by permitting them the taste of profits, a new sense of power and confidence. When the wave of organization of the workers spread to the unorganized mass production industries, autos, steel, electrical machinery, the Fords and Sloans and Swopes decided that the time had come to put a stop to any further building-up of even the reformist trade unions. Finance capital will brook no resistance to the expansion of profits by the wage slaves! The new unions, “federal” or industrial unions, threaten furthermore to advance the class struggle to a new plane at a bound. Heeding the voice of his masters, Roosevelt proceeded to legalize, by use of the self-same 7A clause, the company unions and through them the open shop. At the same time the slight “recovery” has made finance capital chafe at government control, so that part of the NIRA is being abandoned, but not its essential features.
The club used in the NIRA to subdue the rebellion of the productive forces, breaking through the capitalist integuments, (witness the prohibition against installation of new machinery in textile plants, the shutting off by the militia of oil pipe lines, etc.), descends also on the heads of the workers as the class that represents socialized production in its antagonism to the bourgeois system of private property. The state organizes starvation and unemployment for the proletariat. Within the confines of bourgeois democracy, the working class by its own bitter struggle and bloody sacrifice utilizes the rights won by it to organize opposition to capitalist exploitation, to organize its own democracy in the form of trade unions and political parties. But the bourgeoisie uses its power to tie the new organizations, the elements of the new society within the womb of the old, to the capitalist system by controlling them through professional leaders, labor lieutenants of capitalism in the unions, labor politicians in the reformist mass parties. These “leaders” are experts in organizing sham battles through which they “deliver”‘ (betray) the organized workers to the ruling class. The AF of L bureaucracy, added to the councils of the capitalist government to continue their betrayals, forms the greatest menace to the working class. Unless a Left wing armed with correct policies and guided by a truly international Communist party, is constituted within the trade unions, the influx of workers into the unions will be halted and the reverse process will start. In the present situation the workers are being rapidly disillusioned with the Roosevelt NIRA and in the recent strike wave gave every indication of reliance upon their own organized forces to carry on a militant fight against the capitalist class to regain their losses.
The crisis has uprooted all the “normal” interrelationships of the classes in American society. The middle class, including the farmers, has been pauperized. A lumpenproletariat has been formed out of elements of the middle class and the working class. These are the elements that constitute the recruits for Fascism. The NIRA has not brought and could not bring any real cure for the capitalist crisis. At best it has only laid the basis for a new and even worse crisis in the nearest future. Starting as a struggle over collective bargaining the present conflict between the working class and the capitalist class may very well assume larger proportions and take on a mass character. The struggle for the closed shop can easily develop into one for workers’ control of production, for nationalization of industries, for “state socialism” instead of state capitalism.
The NIRA, still organizing the forces of capitalist industry under a form of “autarchy”, will inevitably become more and more openly imperialist under the explosive character of forces of production that demand expansion. Intensive preparations take place for war. Imperialism expands its markets abroad at the expense of the living standards of the masses at home. Imperialism means the end, sooner or later, of all democracy, it means outright Fascism. The economic program of imperialism thus gives rise to its, political counterpart. Only a new internationalist Communist, party can organize the struggle against imperialism, Fascism and the imperialist war. Only that party can lead the workers to victory and establish the dictatorship of the proletariat. Then only will it be possible to really plan economy.



The Chaotic Balkans
Once more the Balkan cauldron threatens to boil over. In retaliation for the assassination of the dictator Alexander by Croat terrorists, the Yugoslavs, accusing the Hungarians of complicity, are resorting to wholesale deportation o1 Hungarians. Official figures issued by the Yugoslavian authorities place the number of those driven out in the most ruthless fashion at three thousand. Yet Belgrade denies that this is a “mass” deportation; it is merely getting rid of undesirable individuals. The Hungarians, whose irredentist struggle to regain territory lost in the War is one of the factors in present Balkan intriguing, have not been behindhand in the expulsion of Yugoslavs. The tension existing at the borders of these two countries is only one added strain among the many tending to tear asunder European civilization and to bring about the second World War.
Insofar as the Balkans were concerned the first World War represented in actuality only a third unfinished Balkan war. It solved nothing but the temporary question of greater military strength. The present economic chaos in Europe is the outcome of the arrested development of the proletarian revolution after the World War. That tremendous upheaval signified the revolt of the productive forces of world economy against the outworn system of national capitalist states. By the failure of the proletarian revolution to spread, the bourgeoisie was permitted to remain in control of the national states and thereby to set in motion once again all the reactionary forces of capitalist imperialism. Thus the Balkans become anew the pawns of the Great Powers in their intrigues for world domination. Today, as at the end of the War, there can be only one real solution for the insoluble contradictions of capitalism that will inevitably make a bloody shambles of the Balkans: the creation under the hegemony of the proletariat of the Soviet Federation of the Balkans as part of the Soviet United States of Europe.
* * *
Italian Foreign Exchange Monopoly
The intense economic warfare of the capitalist nations for the capture of foreign markets during the world crisis unfolds itself in one aspect through the war of currency depreciation. The manipulation of currencies to make goods cheaper on the world market so as to regain a vanishing export trade, was accompanied in all the countries resorting to this weapon by a drive on the living standards of the masses, by a lowering of wages as the other method of producing goods more cheaply. The currency difficulties are far from over and continue to disrupt world economy as one country after the other finds itself in a condition bordering on bankruptcy.
Now it is the turn of Italy to resort to desperate measures to stave off a complete breakdown. Fascist Italy made drastic cuts in wages and salaries by decree in the vain attempt to meet cutthroat competition. Despite all efforts of the Italian capitalists to unload all their difficulties on the backs of the workers and peasants, the fascists now find their gold reserves down close to the minimum permitted by law. The lira is at its lowest value since May 1931. Hence Mussolini has decreed a government monopoly of of foreign exchange through the National Exchange Institute.
All private citizens and corporations are required to make available to this Institute all their foreign credits and holdings. Even foreign securities will be registered in case they must be used to prevent Italy from going off the gold standard and from losing her last gold reserves. A similar situation drove Hitler to attempt the complete withdrawal of German economy from world economy – through the reactionary ideas of autarchy. Mussolini may be forced to take similar measures to protect the Italian bourgeoisie from the onslaught of world forces of capitalism.
* * *
Scrapping the NRA
As the legal end of the NRA approaches, the reactionary forces of American capitalism wish to make sure that there will be no continuance of government interference or control of business in any form whatsoever. Hence there is a concerted effort on the part of big business to apply the utmost pressure to all government agencies to carry out its reactionary program. An address by Jordan of the National Industrial Conference Board delivered at the Philadelphia meeting of the American Academy of Political and Social Sciences, sets forth all the planks desired by the big finance capitalists. He calls for the reduction of the heavy surtaxes on individual and corporate income, the relaxation of the Security Act, the lifting of restrictions regarding minimum wages, maximum hours and the collective bargaining provisions of the NRA (scrapping of the 7-a clause), the cessation of the expenditure of Federal funds for relief, the extension of the CCC and of the subsistence homestead idea, the deportation of alien unemployed, forced labor for other unemployed.
 



The Profit System and Capitalist Sabotage
No class-conscious worker will be fooled by the revelations of so-called “inefficiency” in the handling of food stuffs for relief purposes by the Federal, State and City authorities. When millions of pounds of potatoes, cabbage and veal threaten to glut the market, lower prices and decrease the profits, not of the farmer-producers but of the big commission merchants and the monopoly capitalists of the produce exchanges, the government steps in to protect the interests of the class in power. It buys up the huge food surpluses and hides its real motive for the purchases – the preservation of the profit system – by pretending that the food will go to relieve the starving unemployed. Under cover of this phraseology for deluding the masses, the various agencies of government, Federal, State and City, then cooperate in the task of destroying the food surpluses by a game of “inefficient handling”.
This capitalist sabotage manifests itself everywhere and at all times when the maintaining of profits requires the destruction of wealth, whether in the form of means of production, food supplies or raw materials. The rotting of the foods so desperately needed by the hungry, penniless workers is not a New York phenomenon, it is one more revelation of the decadence and rottenness of the entire capitalist system. Veblen aptly characterized this capitalist sabotage when he spoke of it as the “conscientious withdrawal of efficiency”. It is indeed the brazenly cold-blooded fostering of mass hunger in order to create the demand necessary for the coining of profits in the capitalist market.
* * *
Profits and Housing
Capitalist society in the throes of crisis is faced continually with the problems, of planned economy. But so long as private property and profits remain the backbone – the unbroken backbone – of the economic system, a planned economy remains like a watery mirage in the desert, something thirsted after but far-distant and unattainable. Thus it is with any real housing program of which there is so much talk in banking and industrial circles. The proper housing of the masses is linked up with a myriad of problems that remain almost totally insoluble under capitalism. There is the problem of slum clearance; the moving of large masses out of the cities; the reallocation of industries; the establishment of so-called subsistence homesteads to “solve” the unemployment problem, etc.
What the capitalists desire is that the government shall somehow set the wheels of heavy industry going once more by means of a housing program involving Federal financing and subsidizing society. Thus “city demobilization” would immediately affect land values which would in turn affect the entire taxing structure of the state. There would be a profound effect on the transportation systems built around and through the big centers of population. The entire profit structure involved in the present distribution of foodstuffs would be disturbed. The relations between town and country, between the farmer and city worker, would undergo striking changes. Clearly the need for profits stands uncompromisingly in the way of real planning of housing.
* * *
Housing and the Building Workers
This does not mean that the government will not concoct schemes for aiding the languishing heavy industries through some form of subsidized housing. In its usual fashion the government will attempt to create the illusion that its real aim is to help the unemployed building trades workers. As a matter of fact the whole scheme of starting a housing boom is being linked up with the idea of stimulating greater demand by lowering building costs in the most radical manner. The one completely satisfactory method for accomplishing this objective known to the capitalists, is to conduct a fierce and relentless onslaught on the wages and standards of living of the construction workers.
The government is moving to take the lead in this process of “deflation” of costs. If present intimations become a reality, then we may expect a direct conflict between the construction workers and the capitalist state. Far from helping the building trades workers, the Federal authorities will aim a blow at them. Already there is an effort to encourage the mass production of factory-built houses ready to assemble. This would eliminate the need for any skilled workers who would become part of the permanent reserve army of unemployed. The use of new materials and factory methods is relied upon to create a new industry for capitalist exploitation. Jn this way, from every aspect the government’s housing program contains within it a dark threat to the livelihoods of the construction workers.
 




In a recent issue of the Nation, Mr. Louis Fischer, in a much heralded article, invokes the death of “Trotskyism” for the hundredth time. It seems however that “Trotskyism” always pops up again, much to the dismay of its opponents. The reactionary capitalist Governments of Europe however, don’t care much for ‘’counter-revolutionary Trotskyism”, dead or alive.
Mr. Fischer, like most Stalinist scribes, does not feel impelled to substantiate his “arguments” against Trotsky by any facts, but resurrects the old fiction manufactured by Manuilsky & Co.
Mr. Fischer’s chapter in the international campaign of calumny and falsification starts off with the thesis that Rakovsky’s recantation spells the death of “Trotskyism”. His whole argument revolves around this axis. As if the capitulation of an individual impugns the fundamental principles of that movement. History can not be written so simply. The socialist and communist movement has been pock-marked with desertions, yet the principles of communism remain as unshaken as ever.
 
Causes of Rakovsky’s Capitulation
If Mr. Fischer wants to find out the real meaning and cause of Rakovsky’s capitulation, he himself has given us the clue.
“At a recent party conference in Eastern Siberia,” writes Mr. Fischer, “Emilian Yaraslovsky, a member of the inner Bolshevik circle, spoke of the counter-revolutionaries hired by the bourgeoisie, and the delegates remarked that Trotsky too was in the pay of the capitalists. Yaraslovsky did not have the courage to deny this infamous accusation. His failure to do so was beneath contempt, as Stalin’s effort to rewrite Soviet history so that Trotsky’s role either disappears or becomes besmirched is beneath contempt.”
Yes, and this is but putting it mildly. It is to be wondered that not more of the thousands of exiled and persecuted Bolshevik-Leninists, isolated from any contact with world historic forces, systematically misinformed and deceived, not only as to the activities of Trotsky, but also about the tremendous world-shaking events of the last decade, have not also lost their bearings. In view of these factors, Rakovsky’s capitulation is but a hollow victory by which no clear sighted revolutionist will be misled
Let us now examine some of Mr Fischer’s “arguments”. “Trotsky” says Mr. Fischer, “... believed the New Economic Policy would bring back capitalism”. Where he ever got this information is not indicated, but you may be sure it did not come from Trotsky. Search as you may, in Trotsky’s writings you will not be able to find such a statement. Following this, Mr. Fischer contradicts his own statement by saying that Trotsky was ‘’one of the first to suggest the New Economic Policy”. Yes, Mr. Fischer and you can even go further. Trotsky was the first one to suggest it fully a year before its adoption.
 
“Socialism in One Country”
“Trotsky advocated industrialization on a vast scale”, continues Fischer, “but he did not suppose that socialism could thus be obtained”. Quite so! And in so thinking, he was in full agreement not only with Lenin who conceived of socialism as “the creation of a united world-wide economy, regulated according to a general plan by the proletariat of all nations ...”, but also of every Bolshevik-Internationalist prior to the epoch of Stalinism.
I would seriously recommend to Mr. Fischer, and to the American Stalinists whose history begins with the year 1924, that they devote a little time to the study of the A.B.C. of Communism from Bukharin’s and Preobrozhensky’s text-book which was formerly the official handbook of the Workers School. ‘’The Communist revolution”, says the book, “can be victorious only as a world revolution ...” Since 1924, however, the history of the party has been turned into a palimpsest.
In a book edited and with an introduction by Lenin, Stepanov-Skvortzov wrote:
“The proletariat of Russia never thought of creating an isolated socialist state. A self-sufficient ‘socialist’ State is a petty-bourgeois ideal. A certain approach to this is thinkable with an economic and political preponderance of the petty-bourgeoisie; in isolation from the outside world it seeks a means of consolidating its economic forms, which are converted by the new technique and the new economy into very unstable forms.”
 
Trotsky’s Position
What are Trotsky’s views on this question?
“Socialism,” says T, “is the organization of a planned and harmonious social production for the satisfaction of human wants. Collective ownership of the means of production is not yet socialism, but only its legal premise. The problem of a socialist society cannot be abstracted from the problem of the productive forces, which at the present state of human development are world-wide in their very essence. The separate state, having become too narrow for capitalism, is so much the less capable of becoming the arena of a finished socialist society. The backwardness of a revolutionary country, moreover, increases for it the danger of being thrown back to capitalism. In rejecting the perspective of an isolated socialist development, the Bolsheviks had in view, not a mechanically isolated problem of intervention, but the whole complex of questions bound up with the international economic basis of socialism ... Starting from the world-wide division of labor, the task of socialism is to carry the international exchange of goods and services to its highest development.”
I have attempted here to give the party view on the question of building socialism in one country from the mouths of the official spokesman of the Comintern – up to the Stalinist epoch. Similar views by Zlnoviev, Kamenev, Radek, etc., are all included in the history of the party – up to 1924. It will only be necessary for me to close this phase of the discussion with a quotation from Stalin’s Problems of Leninism (unexpurgated):
 
What Stalin Once Wrote
“To overthrow the power of the bourgeoisie and establish the power of the proletariat in one country, does not mean to guarantee the complete victory of socialism. The chief task of socialism, the organization of socialist production – lies still ahead. Can this task be accomplished? Is it possible to attain the final victory of socialism in one country, without the combined efforts of the proletarians of several advanced countries? No, it is not. The efforts of one country are enough for the overthrow of the bourgeoisie – this is what the history of our revolution tells us. For the final victory of socialism, for the organization of socialist production, the efforts of one country, especially a peasant country like Russia, are not enough – for this we must have the efforts of the proletarians of several advanced countries ... Such in general are the chacteristic features of the Leninist theory of the proletarian revolution.”
* * * *
Industrialization
We will come back to this point shortly. For the moment let us proceed to Mr. Fischer’s next point. Accepting wholeheartedly the canards of the Stalin school he goes on to say that “... collectivization never present itself to him (Trotsky) as a major solution (?)”.
One might suppose that after making a categorical statement like this he would at least mention when or where this was true. But no, the readers of the Nation are left high and dry, for there is no accompanying explanation. What are Trotsky’s views on this question?
“The proletariat,” writes T, “cannot create a new society without bringing the peasantry to socialism through a series of transitional stages, the peasantry being a considerable – in a number of countries a predominant – part of the population, and a known majority on the earth as a whole. (Does this sound like underestimating the peasantry?) The solution of this most difficult of all problems depends in the last analysis upon the quantitative and qualitative correlations between industry and agriculture. The peasantry will the more voluntarily and successfully take the road of collectivization, the more generously the town is able to fertilize their economy and their culture.”
 
Who Killed the Comintern?
Mr. Fischer conveniently limits his remarks to the Soviet Union. It is indeed very disquieting to think of the events which have led to the catastrophic defeats of the working class throughout the world. As Mr. Fischer puts it:
“Europe never looked so dark and beyond hope as at the present tune. Yet Communism makes no headway. The Comintern is a dismal failure.”
Has Mr. Fischer given some thought and study to the problem Why hasn’t he devoted a little space to the position of the “Trotskyists” on these world-shaking events? It is a painful piece of work explaining why Europe looks ‘’so dark and beyond hope”. Mr. Fischer knows full well that the responsibility for this state of affairs rests largely on the nationalistic policy of the Stalinist bureaucracy. That is why the “Comintern is a dismal failure”.
The position of the International Communist League (Left Opposition) has been strikingly confirmed in the most critical events of the past decade. And no Stalinist apologist can white-wash the treacherous nationalistic role of the Comintern to make it appear as revolutionary internationalism. History has stripped the Stalinist International of its last claim to the confidence of the working class. It stands exposed today as a brake on the revolutionary movement.
 
“Trotsky’s World Revolution”
In September, 1932, Mr. Fischer wrote an article in Current History on Trotsky’s World Revolution”. There he endeavored to compare Trotsky’s views on the world situation with those of Stalin. Here is what he says:
“In Germany Trotsky urges a bloc between Communists and Social Democrats to fight fascism. Moscow declares, however, that this is menshevism (sic!), an old Trotskyist malady (!), and that since the Social Democrats had supported the former Bruening, Government, alliance with them would bolster up the German bourgeoisie.”
This however did not prevent the Comintern from supporting the plebiscite in 1931 in which the German Communists voted with the Hitlerites. That united front was all right.
“Trotsky’s most poisonous shafts are aimed against Stalin for his role in the Chinese revolution of 1924–1927 and in the present German crisis. Trotsky maintains that Stalin’s policy in China was not an accident and not a mere mistake, but an inevitable result of his rejection of the doctrine of Permanent Revolution. The acceptance of that theory, Trotsky insists, would have prevented Stalin from supposing that a successful socialist revolution could have issued from a union between the petty-bourgeois Kuomintang and the workers and peasants, in which the Kuomintang was the dominating influence. Trotsky above all, criticizes the Comintern for restraining the German Communist party from decisive revolutionary action.”
 
Propaganda of the Hirelings
I have quoted Mr. Fischer at length so that there will not be any question of misstatement and misinterpretation. And since he so well bears out the claims of the Bolshevik-Leninists as to the revisionist policies of the Comintern, I will, at the risk of being tedious, conclude with a few choice excerpts from his article in Current History. There is no better way to refute the insidious nationalistic propaganda of the Stalinist hirelings than with the words from their own months.
“Since 1927 Stalin has defended the thesis of capitalist-Communist co-existence. The Soviet Government officially proposed a resolution at the International Economic Conference in Geneva in May 1927, which enunciated the idea that the two opposing forms of society could live together in peace and cooperation. On all recent occasions Soviet spokesmen have emphasized the same proposition.”
That this is not just “front” for the benefit of the capitalists but an integral part of the new philosophy of the Soviet bureaucracy is indicated in a speech made by Litvinoff, before the Central Executive Committee of the Soviet Union (not a chamber of Commerce):
“... my conversations with President Roosevelt convinced us both of the absolute possibility of the closest relations and cooperation for peace by our two countries. One cannot but admire President Roosevelt’s perspicacity in realizing not only the uselessness of continued struggle with us in the name of capitalism but the value of relations with us not only for the sake of America’s national interests but for the cause of peace.”
It is only because Lenin is pinned under a mausoleum and Trotsky exiled that they dare mouth such vicious, reactionary views. And to think that these statements are broadcast throughout the world to delude the workers into believing that the capitalist nations are really interested in peace!
 
Close-up of Stalinism
Mr. Fischer continues:
“At the end of the second Five-Year Plan in 1937, according to sanguine Bolshevist (?) claims socialism will hare been established in Russia (!), despite the persistence of capitalism everywhere else. The Russian Communists therefore, are devoting themselves to the tasks at home. They are more introverted than ever before. Foreign politics interests them largely as a means of neutralizing outside hostility and of obtaining credits. Anything that may interfere seriously with domestic improvement is avoided. The Bolsheviki would say that capitalists will do more than the communists to undermine capitalism. Today, despite the universal depression, they view the world scene soberly (!) and, while discerning a gradual shift to the left, are skeptical about a red uprising, even in Germany, not to speak of other countries. ... But how would the Communists in the Soviet Union behave if revolution were imminent in some important country? What if Germany or France or Japan were on the very threshold of a national social upheaval? The historical precedent is Germany to 1923. The Reich had been impoverished by inflation. Bread riots had occurred in numerous cities. The German Communists were planning an uprising. With one hand the Comintern helped them. But Stalin said: ‘In my opinion we must restrain the Germans and not encourage them’.”
Is it any wonder then that Hitlerism and not Communism triumphed in Germany?
 





Diplomacy at the Breaking Point
The diplomatic staffs, those Boards of Directors for national capitalist imperialism, have brought the next war a long ways nearer by their none-too-veiled challenges to each other. The pleasant European vacation of Charles Schwab during which, by one of those peculiarly fortunate coincidences, he happened to bump into several rather influential Chinese henchmen of Chiang-Kai-shek and – what is more charmingly natural than the combining of a little business with pleasure! – proceeded to arrange for the sale of vast supplies of munitions to China, called forth without delay the threat of force contained in Amau’s statement of Japan’s protectorate over China.
This document, issued to all Japanese consuls in China some weeks ago, is thus made public most in discretely but also most opportunely. Called upon to explain by “startled” American and British capitalism, the Japanese rulers, far from disclaiming the document or rejecting its viewpoint, merely state that it is not “official”. Magic word! At the same time Matsuoka, former League delegate and defender of the Manchurian adventure, is permitted – to be sure in a “private” capacity – to launch the sharpest, most plain-spoken attack yet made on American imperialism. All of which indicates that diplomacy, with its maneuvring for advantage, is close to the breaking point.
* * * *
And indeed how could diplomacy solve the life and death problems of imperialist capitalism? The U.S. and Japan are driven with irresistible force to seek abroad their salvation from the internal contradictions that suffocate them within their own national boundaries. China is the last, albeit the vastest market that remains, still undivided and ripe for colonial exploitation. That the fierce struggle to conquer this market will be ultimately transformed from the sphere of diplomacy to the field of battle, is inevitable. Under the present conditions of rivalry, with each new development diplomacy merely reveals its utter impotence to do anything but seek justification for the unrestrained banditry of capitalism.
* * * *

The Attack on Labor Deepens
In their more and more open attempt to choke off and stifle labor’s revolt against the unbearable living conditions imposed on the working class by the NRA, Roosevelt and Johnson forge new weapons and place new obstacles in the path of the oppressed. Every strike brings home more keenly to the working class the lesson that all the forces of the government are at the service of the capitalists and are arrayed against the workers.
The intensive drive under Roosevelt’s direction for the open shop and against the real organization of labor, reveals the use of every agency of betrayal, – the creation of fake “impartial” boards (National Auto Board), the use of company unions to prevent the closed shop, the use of the courts for strikebreaking injunctions, the intervention of the NRA machinery for capitalist defense, and above all the resort to the labor lieutenants of capitalism for class collaborationist sell-outs.
In the Fisher Body strike the meaning of the refusal of Johnson to permit the majority of the workers to bargain for all, becomes obvious. The fake company union appeals to the courts to prevent its “members”, a minority, from being kept out of the plant by the pickets of the vast majority.
* * * *

Who Is Aided, Who Is Not?
The Weirton case became and remains the touchstone for the disillusioning of those workers who thought Roosevelt was helping them. The NRA can apply pressure upon the workers to yield up their living standards at the will of the bosses, but it has no power over the big capitalists.
Weir has flouted the government with impunity and – lo and behold! – he receives a PWA sub-contract through the loan made by Sec. Ickes to the New York Central Railroad, although Ickes has the right to reject the sub-contract for violation of the law.
The railroads receive most subsidies while the railroad workers starve. A report that is being suppressed by the government, shows low severely these workers were hit by the crisis. Homes, savings, iving standards, insurance, health, recreation, all were sacrificed due to wage cuts and part time employment, if not total unemployment.
And yet Roosevelt, defending the profits and dividends of the big capitalists, tried to force these miserably exploited workers to be satisfied to continue living under these conditions and to accept the wage cut for an indefinite period. The railroad workers have not yet answered Roosevelt. They have been sold out for the moment.
 





British Imperialism in Retreat
The great inroads into the export trade of Great Britain incurred in the Japanese drive for world markets are a source of profound disquiet to English diplomats. The fierce impact of Japanese competition exposes to full view the weakness of British capitalism in decay while revealing simultaneously the intensity of exploitation of Japanese labor. England’s efforts at retaliation are thus far puny and impotent. The establishing of quotas in the Crown colonies can affect at best some five percent of Japan’s textile exports. This economic weakness in meeting the present situation makes it aft the easier for Japanese imperialism to wring political concessions from the English government.
In the game of imperialist politics it is Japan’s aim either to woo America away from an alliance with the Soviet Union, or failing this – and simultaneously – to checkmate America by balancing the U.S. with England. Given a fair price the English statesmen will not be averse to a trade. The first concession made to Japan is contained in Simon’s statement that Great Britain is not pledged to preserve the integrity of China. This establishes the first open serious rift between America and England. For America for its own good purposes views the Nine Power Treaty as precisely such a pledge. British diplomacy tells Japan that it may safely proceed to seize and subdue by force of arms more of the Chinese mainland without English, opposition.
* * * *

Threat of Japanese Bonapartism
Capitalism is everywhere a system held together by a mortar of fraud and corruption. Japanese capitalism is if anything more permeated with thievery than its Western models. The scandal just uncovered in the Treasury Ministry in connection with the Bank of Taiwan and the Imperial Rayon Co. is but one of a long series. Coming however at a time of great internal stress, when the interrelationships of classes are shifting perceptibly, due to the swifter flow of the undercurrents of social upheaval, the Japanese bank scandal is having an effect similar to that of the Stavisky affair in France.
The reactionary militarists in control of the army are setting their forces in motion to stifle the rebellion of the oppressed masses of workers and peasants.
* * * *

The Soviet Union Slowly Encircled
Since the last war and its outcome in the creation of the Soviet Union, – the greatest step forward! in the history of humanity and the greatest menace to world capitalism – the capitalist governments are somewhat fearful of precipitating a new war. Their fear is not so much of defeat by the enemy abroad as it is of the revolutionary working class at home. Thus to prepare for the inevitable next war the ruling class is impelled to safeguard its rear, to protect the base at home.
Capitalism in decay thus resorts, for this as for other reasons, to fascism, a system of governing by armed force and brutal suppression directed openly against the working class, a system of terrorizing the masses and destroying their independent organizations, a system designed to assure “civil peace” in the rear.
The process of fascization of one country after the other is slowly bringing about the encirclement of the Soviet Union by fascist states. With the help of Germany Latvia has established its form of violent anti-working class dictatorship. Now Bulgaria, probably with the encouragement of France, has experienced a palace revolution, a Bonapartist coup d’état by the monarchy supported by the Junker class, the aim here too being to rid the capitalist state of all revolutionary opposition. Despite the fact that the fascist states assume their own inner alignments in imperialist rivalry, on all sides events sweep steadily, irrevocably, to the outbreak of the next terrible imperialist war with its central aim the destruction of the Soviet Union.
* * * *

Litvinov and the League of Nations
It is this desperate plight of the Soviet Union, no longer able through the Comintern and mass Communist Parties in the capitalist countries to mobilize the working class of Europe in defense of the Soviet Union, that Litvinov attempts to substitute for such a mass movement by playing off one imperialist group against another. The less Litvinov can rely on the international revolutionary forces of the workers, the more closely he feels bound to the League of Nations under French domination. We cannot wait for events to prove the emptiness of this defense, we must build the Fourth International to defend the workers’ fatherland.
 





Amter’s United Front with Fascists
Like burning handwriting on the wall, the lessons of the catastrophe of the German proletariat stand out, clear for all to behold. For all, that is, but the Stalinists whose eyes are shut tightly to all lessons, who have become impotent to check theory against practice, courses of action against events. There is no limit to the depths of degradation to which such a party can sink. It makes a horrible caricature of every policy and principle of Communism.
The latest brilliant application of Stalinist tactics is Amter’s exposition in the Daily Worker of the United Front from Below with fascist “rank and file workers”. The great leaders and teachers of our movement, faced with the condition of an organized working class divided among reformist and revolutionary organizations, taught the great value of the united front tactic.
Communists utilize the united front established between workers’ organizations, to raise the class consciousness of the class and to teach workers in the course of struggle the correctness of revolutionary policy as against the betrayals of reformist policy.
* * * *

Completing the Cycle of Folly
The Stalintern, failing to grasp oven the faintest significance of the united front policy, lost all possibility of acting as a unifying force of the proletariat. Instead the Stalinists deepened the rift between the Social Democratic and the Communist workers, first by denouncing as counter-revolutionary any attempt at the united front; later, driven by events to a treacherous course of covering up rather than examining and admitting its previous criminal blunders, they opposed the Marxist united front with the meaningless united front from below.
This ultimatist tactic of demanding that workers break the discipline of their own organization to secure the blessings of a united struggle with Stalinism entirely under its own banner, this puerile caricature of dialectic thinking, made impossible the struggle against fascism and the achieving of Communist leadership over the wide masses of workers in the course of struggle.
Fascism proceeded in Germany to utilize the lack of proper guidance of the working class organizations and their split ranks to make inroads from above – by winning over petty bourgeois elements threatened with pauperization, fearful of being driven down into the ranks of the proletariat, – and from below – by attracting, thru demagogy and bribery, sections of the desperate unemployed and the lumpenproletariat. The aid to fascism of treacherous Stalinism was rewarded – by the complete annihilation of the Communist Party!
And now in America it is proposed that the workers pursue exactly the same course! Amter – can it be sheer insane mockery? – proposes to apply the tactic that was intended to unite the workers for militant struggle against fascism, not to the organized workers, but to the organized fascists, the khaki shirts! Finding some demoralized workers, lost forever to any heightening of class consciousness, in the ranks of organized fascism.
The Stalinists propose to win them back by applying to the ranks of the worst enemy of the working class the tactic of the united front from below, the same false tactic that tends to drive these elements to fascism to begin with by destroying the unity of the proletariat! The cycle of folly is complete! The Stalinist Party, having lost its moorings, utterly demoralized, becomes incapable of distinguishing aetween the decisive layers of the working class and the riff-raff of society.
* * * *

Petty-Bourgeois Cringing!
By this application of the United front tactic the American C.P. reveals unmistakably its petty bourgeois character. For it is an indelible mark, to the discerning eye, of the same capitulatory tendency that caused the German betrayal. Amter’s very tone – lacking completely in ultimatism and denunciation when speaking of the fascists that was characteristic of the approach to socialist workers – betrays a shameful cringing.
“We must not make the mistake”, says Amter in the Daily Worker for the whole world to read, “that was proposed in the opportunist slogan of some comrades of the German C.P., ‘Smash the fascists wherever you meet them’ which was rejected by the C.C. of the C.P.G.” But it is only by smashing the fascists at the very inception of their movement, only by sectional struggles against every smallest germ of fascism as it shows itself, that the worker, joined in a real united front, learn how to crush fascism in the major battle to come.
 





The New German Decrees
Fascism is a governmental system under capitalist rule, based on the uprooting of all the elements of proletarian democracy, when these weapons of the workers, forged with such difficulty in courageous struggle, are turned against the ruling class in a challenge for power. Under the bloody dictatorship of the fascists all the independent, voluntary organizations of the working class are destroyed, smashed to bits. Thus May Day of last year saw the dissolution in Germany of the trade unions and the cooperatives accompanied by the confiscation of all their property.
* * * *

“Iron Heel” Legislation
But the wiping out of the organizations of proletarian democracy does not satisfy enraged, terror-stricken capitalism. The new epoch of civil peace must be guaranteed! No opportunity must be left the workers to reforge their weapons of struggle. The Nazis fulminate rabidly against the shameful Versailles Treaty imposed by the Allies after the war with the aim of rendering Germany powerless. But the Nazis insist on their own Versailles Treaty imposed internally after their bloody suppression of the workers in the class war.
Hitler will keep the working class under enforced disunity, he wiil render them powerless to resist by a firmly-continued policy of repression. Hence this May Day the promulgation of new “Iron Heel” legislation. Any propaganda against the National Socialist State is declared high treason, punishable by death if need be. An undisguised lynch court is set up in the form of a People’s Court, the judges to be selected by the present rulers. Even the defense attorney in any case sent before this tribunal for terrorizing the oppressed, must secure the approval of the judges. And there is to be no appeal from their decision!
* * * *

The Value of Organization
As if to give point to the bitter lesson that must be fully absorbed by every worker from the situation in Germany, there comes the illustration of the impotence of a working class without its own independent organizations. In the shop elections for worker representation recently held all over Germany, the clearest indications of opposition to the Nazi regime are visible. Altho under the fierce social pressure created and exerted by the forces of reaction, many workers have succumbed to Nazi “success”, there still remain many class-conscious workers bitterly opposed to the regime of bourgeois terror. Hence despite the fact that a ballot cast for anybody other than the listed Nazi candidates was to be voided, large majorities in various localities, as reported by the National Zeituug of Essen, voted against the Nazis.
But the ballots are merely voided! Having no independent organizations ready to enforce their expressed will, this protest of the German workers remains impotent! Had they fought, arms in hand, for the existence of their parties and trade unions, the enemy, the capitalists, would today be impotent, not the workers.
* * * *

The New York Post and the Middle Class
The bought defenders of the capitalist system, which category includes the bourgeois press, are well aware that the big bourgeoisie rule only with the aid of the petty bourgeoisie, including the farmers. Generally content to follow in the wake of the big finance capitalists, so long as things run smoothly, the middle class becomes disoriented the moment a crisis supervenes. Faced with ruin and pauperization, witnessing the obvious anarchy and chaos of capitalist production, those classes immediately above the proletariat are subjected to a process of radicalization during a crisis. It then becomes possible for a wisely led and united proletariat to win over wider sections of these oppressed masses. Faced with this danger the bourgeoisie must resort to new means, “left” methods of canalizing the anger and protest of this necessary ally. Hence the series of muckraking campaigns conducted by the Post.
Of course workers picked up and misled in this process will do no harm either. Thus we see a campaign on Firetrap Tenements and on Milk Prices. Also campaigns on banking and finance scandals and now on the Mortgage racket. But when it comes to war the “pacifist” Post leads its deluded readers to believe that it is only the European countries that are imperialist rivals of Japan in the East, not good-hearted America. The problem of winning the middle class is vital and must not be left to the paid demagogs of capitalism.
 





The Period of Concessions Closing
American capitalists, having gained respite thru a policy of apparent concessions based on the NRA, now breathe more easily and begin to show their bared fists to the organized workers. The pretense that the NRA gave recognition to labor’s complete right to organize trade unions, is being rapidly discarded. The drive is now on for the open shop. Even the A.F. of L. unions alarm the bosses, not because of any real accomplishment of its leadership for the working class, but because of its potentialities as a rallying force for the unorganized. The first steps to build up industrial (“federal”) unions in the mass production industries, arouses the utmost fury of big business which proceeds without delay to open up a sharp counter-attack on the A.F. of L. The threat of the auto strike was the signal for this attack.
* * * *

The Open Shop Drive
In the sharpening struggle, Roosevelt and Johnson obey the behests of the big capitalists and act as the spearhead of the attack. A meeting of fifty iron and steel companies, convened at Pittsburgh recently, hailed Roosevelt’s leading statement on the auto industry: “The government makes it clear that it favors no particular form of employee organization or representation. The government’s only duty is to secure absolute and uninfluenced freedom of choice? without coercion, restraint or intimidation from any source.” Quite correctly the companies interpret this statement as encouragement to build company unions, which will be recognized by NRA officials and will meet “collectively” with real trade union representatives in negotiations with the bosses.
Even the bourgeois press press labels the acceptance of the terms of the auto agreement as a major defeat of the A.F. of L. and therefore of the working class. Simultaneously the steel barons condemn the Wagner bill, outlawing company unions, whereupon this bill, never intended seriously except to lull the workers into passivity thru the false hope that “government” would aid the workers in attaining their aims, is unceremoniously scuttled.
* * * *

Dividing the Movement
Nor is it by accident or thru sheer generosity that the General Electric Co., the steel mills and the coal mine’s grant wage increases and concessions in hours at this time. Organized labor must be prevented above all else (for that might prove decisive in the struggles to come) from spreading in the steel mills, and workers must be pacified in the mines while the major offensive is conducted to halt the influx into the unions and to assure the open shop. Besides this, the ending of the CWA and the shutting off of all relief to millions of workers, makes it necessary to divide the employed from the unemployed. This movement of the unemployed workers will unquestionably take on a militant character in the present situation, and hence the preparations of the boss class to isolate it.
Clearly it becomes our task to help redouble the campaign for organizing the workers in the basic mass production industries; to expose the open shop and company union drive, aided by Roosevelt and also by the corrupt A.F. of L. bureaucracy; to unite employed and unemployed in a militant struggle on all fronts against the concerted drive of the capitalists to pauperize the working class.
* * * *

Bourgeois Nightmares
The bourgeoisie cannot sleep well o’ nights. It sees spectres everywhere. It is acutely aware of the crystalization of the class struggle in one country after the other into such clear-cut form as to make possible only one of two choices as the next step in social evolution: the road to communism or the road to fascism. Hence the uneasiness and the nervousness manifest on a national scale. The Hearst press utilizes these fears to prepare a new “anti-red” drive by means of the series of articles on American. Communism by that arch-reactionary, Easley, of the Civic Federation.
A large section of the capitalist class never accepted Roosevelt’s strategy of “liberal” treatment for the workers even temporarily. They feared that Roosevelt’s policy might stimulate and encourage rather than discipline and “control” the workers’ movement. This section of the bourgeoisie has bided its time to open the attack against Roosevelt. The present blast against Roosevelt takes the form of an attack on his “brain trust.” It is fitting that this blast should be opened by Wirt, founder of the factory school system at Gary, Indiana. He mistrusts “liberalism” and would prefer – and prepares the way for – outright fascism.
 





Japan’s Monroe Doctrine for Asia
The ruthless policy of Japanese militarism requires no documentary proof. During more than a generation the Japanese ruling class has made abundantly clear its inflexible aim of fixing the colonial yoke on the necks of the Chinese masses – and to do this before the other imperialist robber powers gain too strong a foothold in China. The notorious Twenty-one Demands made on China during the War and the Tanaka Document merely set forth the obvious, the unrestrained, cold-blooded bandit ambitious of Japanese militarism.
Why then the startled reaction of the capitalist press when Amau, chief of the intelligence division of the foreign office, mouthpiece of Hirota, formulates Japan’s Monroe Doctrine for Asia, with its warning that Japan will resist by force any encroachments by others on its preserves in China? The answer lies in the fact that capitalist “peace” is merely a truce between wars for plunder that Amau’s brutally frank statement disturbs the present truce and sets up the tremors that betoken the nearness of the next war.
* * * *

Japanese Uncertainty
It has been clear for some time that the Japanese ruling class is divided in counsel. Recognition of the U.S.S.R. by the U.S. gave pause to the shrewder spirits among the militarists who realized the suicidal nature of a war against an alliance of two such formidable powers as the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. The perspective of immediate intervention in the Soviet Union slowly faded and a change in foreign policy resulted, the effort being made to woo America away from the Soviet alliance. Simultaneously Japan has been seeking assurance from British capitalism that England would “balance” the U.S. in case of war with the Soviet Union. Does the present turn signify that these assurances have been gained? Or is this merely the result of the pent-up emotions of those Japanese reactionaries who cannot await a more propitious moment for attack?
* * * *

The Danger of Waiting
Waiting too is a dangerous policy. It permits the Soviet Union to strengthen its defenses. It gives the U.S. a chance, not merely to build a powerful navy, but to seek what has become essential to U.S. imperialism, a military base in China. The Japanese properly interpret the aid given Chiang Kai-shek by America in the training of aviators, the selling of planes, the building of airports and communications, and the setting up of an airplane factory, as one step in the direction of establishing a military foothold on the Asiatic mainland.
Waiting means also the sharpening of the class struggle internally in Japan. The intense struggle to maintain her aims in foreign trade, so severely under attack by the jealous powers, involves the ever fiercer oppression of the Japanese masses of workers and peasants. The militarists are acutely aware of the volcano upon whose top they sit. The explosive internal forces, they delude themselves into believing, can be directed outwardly and dissipated. History will show how deluded they were.
* * * *

Roosevelt and Nationalization
Roosevelt continues to attack the living standards of the workers to assure dividend and interest payments to the capitalists. Again, after a policy of temporizing and delay so as to dull the edge of the railroad workers’ fighting spirit, Roosevelt insists on maintaining the wage cut. He insists that he does not want nationalization of the railroads but will be forced to take steps towards rigid control unless the railroad magnates reform the capital structure of these public utilities.
By such deception Roosevelt hopes to gain the sympathy of the middle and upper classes in his fight against the railway workers. For there is not another field of capitalist “enterprise” that offers a clearer picture of capitalist plundering and looting of public finances than the field of railroad transportation.
Roosevelt’s attitude towards nationalization is that of his class. He fears nothing so much as a real political struggle supported by the masses and the middle classes, for nationalization of the railroads. The capitalists fear that this would be an entering wedge which might precipitate a real struggle for state socialism.
It was in this sense that Railway Age recently answered Jordan of the National Industrial Conference Board when he predicted nationalization. The editors stated that the resistance to state socialism would prevent nationalization of the railways.
 





All Eyes To France!
The lessons of the victory of Hitler and the tragic defeat of the German proletariat are eagerly absorbed by the bourgeoisie of other countries. The “pattern” of bloody reaction once supplied in the present epoch, it becomes all the easier for the capitalist class in any country, faced with the danger to it of radicalization of the masses and a militant proletariat, to hasten the process of establishing a Fascist dictatorship. It is in this sense hat a wave of reaction spreads from country to country, just as a successful revolution brings the workers to their feet everywhere. It is in this sense too that the defeat of the proletariat of one country is a defeat of the working class of the entire world.
In France reaction moves apace. The Doumergue government of “national concentration”, to which has been assigned the task of ushering in Fascism, prepares as its first step to get rid of parliament so as to rule by decree. A measure is about to be proposed to permit the President to dissolve the House of Deputies at will. Doumergue is to receive the entire initiative in matters of finance also. Thus the executive arm of the government is to be strengthened before the open offensive against the working class.
* * * *

Uniting of the Forces of Reaction
The strong resistance of the workers to the attempted Fascist coup d’état during the March riots, has served to unite the entire reactionary wing of the bourgeoisie. Such organizations as the Action Française, the Jeunesses Patriotes (Patrotic Youth), the Solidarité Française (the armed bands of Coty), and the Croix de Feu, reactionary veterans under the influence of the notorious munitions makers, the Comité des Forges, have closed ranks against the working class. The Croix de Feu, in accepting the cuts in pensions imposed by Doumergue, has given him an ultimatum to take clear steps toward Fascism before July 1st when the cut is to become effective. Weygand and other Generals of the Clerical persuasion, are playing identically the same role as the Italian and German Fascist generals in arming and drilling reactionary sections of the middle class. And Doumergue has already begun to disarm the workers.
* * * *

Fascist or Proletarian Dictatorship?
The French workers have shown splendid readiness to unite to defeat fascism. It was their revolutionary outpouring into the streets that shut the door to an immediate Fascist coup d’état. But the question now resolves itself into one of organization and leadership. Only Soviets, guided by a militant policy, leading the workers from a defensive struggle for workers’ rights to the transformation of this struggle for the seizure of power can save France from the fate of Germany.
* * * *

The Farmer and American Imperialism
American imperialism is faced with the dilemma common to the capitalists of all the advanced industrial countries. That dilemma involves the imperialist policy of monopoly capitalism for the native farmers. The home farmers are the competitors of the farmers of the backward and the colonial countries to whom the imperialists must sell their surplus production over and above what can be sold in the home market. The backward agricultural countries can only buy goods if they in turn can sell to the advanced nations their farm products. The American capitalists would like to arrange matters so that this happy state of exchange is brought about – at the expense of the American farmer. Roosevelt and Wallace are engaged, underneath all their programs of immediate farm relief, in carrying through this aim of monopoly capitalism. They would like to cut down the export crop acreage as much as possible.
 

The Farmers as Social Anchor
But here is the rub. In England this process was carried to completion by the wiping out of the farmer class. If this occurred in America, what class in society could the capitalists depend upon for support in case of proletarian revolt? The capitalists are few, the workers many. The farmers, if handled properly, can be made a bulwark of reaction for the defense of “social Stability”; that is, for the defense of capitalism. Hence the imperialists are forced to compromise in this dilemma. They would like nothing better than to establish a peasant class living on a subsistence level and not producing capitalist crops. But this is not easy to accomplish.
 





After the CWA What?
The CWA was Roosevelt’s creation for the ostensible purpose of warding off “degradation” and “degeneration” of starving workers by the granting of outright doles. The independent spirit of the workers was to be upheld by the payment of wages for “honest” toil, just as in the private system of wage slavery. In actuality the CWA was coldly calculated to scotch the struggle for unemployment insurance that threatened to establish the workers’ right to live, their right to a lien on government funds obtained from the bourgeoisie for the purpose. Roosevelt is now unloading the burden of relief. Nor do the states and local communities show any sympathetic desire to shoulder the burden dropped by the federal government.
The U.S. government has taken its cue from English and European experience. Only those who can prove “need” are to be continued on relief. The entire sham and pretense of the “liberal” program of Roosevelt is contained in the “pauper’s oath”, as the questionnaire to be filled out by all CWA workers has been rightly dubbed. This outrageous document leaves nothing to be desired in the way of capitalist preying and snooping for the purpose of avoiding relief and involving the unemployed worker in the reddest of red tape. The widespread protest that has ensued must be organized to reopen in a most powerful manner and on a now plane the fight for immediate relief, unemployment insurance or the providing of jobs for those willing to work.
* * * *

Madison Square Garden
M. Olgin has shown his usual haste in coming to the defense of reactionary Stalinist Communism. As American correspondent for Pravda he hastened to wire Moscow on the occurrence of Feb. 17th at Madison Square Garden. His story appears in the Pravda of Feb. 18th in a statement that betrays the utter inability of the official Party to explain away its anti-working class disruption of the socialist meeting. Olgin states that the socialists began a vicious attack, in their speeches, on the Party, whereupon Hathaway marched to the platform to “refute the socialist charges”. Come, come! Olgin will have to work in better agreement with the “leaders” on the line.
* * * *

England
The workers of London, fearful of the organized assault of Fascism on their democratic rights and on their working class organizations, have turned to the one party they “trust”, the Labor Party. The London municipal government is now controlled by a Labor Party majority. Knowing its own record, the Labor Party was itself taken by surprise by this vote of confidence. As though the gaping holes in the Vienna workers’ apartments had no meaning, the leader of the Labor Party in London, M. Morrison, proceeded to outline the reforms, particularly in housing, that would soon be inaugurated.
Without question this vote has great national significance for England. It is one answer to Lord Rotheremere’s ballyhoo for Fascist dictatorship. The first reaction of the workers in their struggle against the open dictatorship of the club, is to rally to the defense of democratic institutions and to place them in the hands of a working class party. Nor can the internationalist Communists afford to ignore this fact. They must know how to lead the workers in this progressive struggle so as to show up the utter inadequacy and betrayal of reformist leadership. In the open struggle that is bound to develop, the workers must be led, by utilizing their immediate aims, step by step along the revolutionary road to power, a road that is clearly visible on the historic scale only to the Communist. The vote indicates that the workers have been aroused to the need for resistance against reaction. This mood of struggle must be encouraged by proper internationalist-Communist leadership.
 





The A.F. of L. Bureaucracy
The new wave of strikes sweeping the country alarms not only the capitalists but the A.F. of L. bureaucracy as well. For in the present situation militant action of the workers may spread like wildfire and get “out of hand,” thereby becoming a threat to the labor lieutenants of capital just as much as to the bosses. Let the proletariat once signal their determination to pay off their oppressors for the agonies they have endured, and the battle will take on undreamed of proportions. The bosses are fearful that a strike, starting in the automotive industry, will quickly spread to the steel plants and to the railroads. And how much would it take to bring the miners to their feet?
The class struggle is irrepressible but the A.F. of L. with its treacherous, reactionary leadership and its obsolete craft structural basis, acts at this juncture at a serious obstacle to militant action. By its policy of delay and fake “progress” with the aid of the NRA machinery, the bureaucracy plans to harness the proletariat, substitute for the real battle on and hold it in check. The intend to the industrial field the sham battles in Washington.
* * *

The Role of Roosevelt
Roosevelt becomes the “impartial” arbiter in this game played at the expense of the workers. Roosevelt, who was hailed last November by the boss magazine Automotive Industry for his aid against the tool and die makers in their struggle that formed the prelude to the present one: “Without doubt President Roosevelt’s recent communication to General Johnson, interpreting the NRA labor clause in line with automobile producers’ views, had a considerable psychological effect in breaking the backbone of the strike.” Roosevelt, who is hamstringing the railroad workers by announcing in advance of their negotiations that he favors the retention of 10% wage “deduction.” Roosevelt, who mobilizes the nation’s resources to bolster up finance capitalism and to raise profits for the bosses while beating down the living standards of the working class. To expose Roosevelt means to expose the entire fraud of class collaboration practiced on the workers.
* * *

The Philippines
Roosevelt has just signed the bill granting complete independence to the Philippines – ten years from now. It is strange that we leave our rejoicing till then? Meantime we prefer to watch how the United States will most likely not dismantle its naval bases and fortifications in these islands of the militarized Pacific. The Philippines are merely a stepping stone to more distant shores for American imperialism. [line of text missing] The bourgeoisie hopes to solve its internal impasse, its desperate need for expanded markets, by challenging Japan for domination in China. The Philippines are the most trifling pawns in the bigger game of imperialism. The United States, in the maneouvering for “position,” appears to retreat for the moment the better to attack later.
* * *

The New York Post and Civic Virtue
The Post has been conducting an investigation to determine the state of knowledge of the masses regarding the names of “their” elected” representatives in the city, state and federal governments. And the estimable Post editors have been scandalized to learn that the average run of person is abysmally ignorant of capitalist politics and politicians. In itself this shows quite clearly that the capitalist government is not “theirs,” i.e. that of the masses.
We refer the Post to Engels’ remarks on this subject:
“There is no country in which ‘politicians’ form a more powerful and distinct section of the nation than in North America. There each of the two great parties which alternately succeed each other in power is itself in turn controlled by people who make a business of politics, who speculate on seats in the legislative assemblies of the Union as well as of the separate states, or who make a living by carrying on agitation for their party and on its victory are rewarded with positions. It is common knowledge that the Americans have been striving for years to shake off this yoke which has become intolerable, and that in spite of all they can do they continue to sink ever deeper in this quicksand of corruption. – And nevertheless we find here two great groups of political speculators, who alternately take possession of the state machine and exploit it by the most corrupt means and for the most corrupt ends – and the nation is powerless against these two great cartels of politicians who are ostensibly its servants, but in reality exploit and plunder it.”
 





Manhattan Housing
East side, West side, the firetraps of Manhattan have taken their toll of sixteen lives of women and children in recent weeks. Horrified working class mothers and children, aroused to realization of their awful plight, have demonstrated against these conditions brought about by the landlords’ greed and have demanded enforcement of the law. And in good old muck-raking style, so effective in capitalizing misery to build up circulation, the New York Evening Post investigates and exposes the landlords responsible, none other, of course, than the elite of society, the wealthiest families, the Stuyvesants and Astors and Wendels.
These old tenement houses “paid for themselves” many times over with the exorbitant rents squeezed out of the poor. But the landlords have ever an eye for the main chance, in this case the unloading of an investment that no longer pays on the city. So Vincent Astor, “liberal” host during Roosevelt’s vacations, comes forward magnanimously to offer his many tinder-boxes to LaGuardia at any price at all – say, “to be fair”, two-thirds or three-quarters of assessed value, immediately fifty other landlords follow suit. To understand this overwhelming burst of generosity one need only remember that assessed values are far higher than present real values; that the high land values in Manhattan act as an insurmountable barrier to the rehousing of families in the slum districts; that whereas dwellings have increased in all the other boroughs, they have decreased by more than five thosuand in Manhattan in the past five years; that “recruiting” for the slums has decreased with the lowering of immigration. The mouths of the landlords water for the cash to be handed out by the R.F.C. for slum clearance. On top of this the City offer to tear down free, for the landlord, with the aid of CWA workers, all firetrap tenements which should have been razed years ago by the landlords. Yes, charity does begin at home!
 

Cuba —
The situation of the organizations of the Cuban workers, the trade unions in particular, has become desperate. Mendieta, the “strong” man, the puppet speaking with the voice of Wall Street is attempting to carry out the mandate granted him by U. S. imperialism. He aims to break the backbone of the Cuban working class by first smashing its organs of struggle on the economic front, the trade unions.
The Cuban Revolution, the achievement of the Cuban masses, is at stake in the present struggle. Only the working class, leading the peasants and the oppressed masses, can save the Revolution by carrying it forward. A strong united front of the workers of town and plantation must be cemented by the building of Soviets, the weapon of defense of the workers. The united front of the oppressed has the immediate aim of defending the democratic rights won by the downfall of Machado, in particular the right to organize and strike. The workers are now on the defensive but, despite the Caffery-Mendieta machinations, the struggle has not yet terminated. Mendieta can still be prevented from consolidating power completely if the masses can be rallied in the struggle for democratic rights. But this struggle must be directed along the road to Soviets.
 

The Japanese-English Textile Negotiations
In the war of currency depreciation for the purpose of extending foreign markets, Japan started the earliest and gained the most. She gained the most because her foreign trade forms so large a percentage of her economy and since inflation made her goods dirt-cheap In world markets, she was able to drive all competitors out of the market. The bulk of Japan’s exports are textile goods, cotton and to a less extent silk. The cheapness of Japanese cotton goods has resulted in an amazing loss of business for the British textile mills. The largest Empire market, India, was flooded with Japanese textiles until the outcry of the English capitalists brought the threat to close this market completely to Japan, Japan retaliated by declaring a boycott on Indian raw cotton.
The negotiations for a “truce” on a world scale continued in London but the Japanese, in the superior position, wanted to limit the truce to British Empire markets only. The result was the breakdown of the conference and the problem has now been taken from the hands of the capitalists into those of the diplomats. Unquestionably the Japanese will lay down political conditions for concessions in trade that will involve the stand of England in the imminent war. If Japan can obtain England’s promise to checkmate the U.S. in the matter of allying with the Soviet Union against Japan, the latter may hesitate no longer in her planned attack.
 



THE capitalist state throughout its history represents the embodiment of the rule of the bourgeoisie. So long as capitalism exists, the government is endowed with the powers of the state as the executive committee of the big bourgeoisie. But as the system of capitalist exploitation changes, as it undergoes the inevitable development towards ever greater concentration of capital, towards the coalescence of industry into powerful monopolies under the all-pervasive domination of finance capital, as the capitalist nation follows, in short, those iron laws of economic necessity that rule underneath all the anarchy of capitalist production, new demands are made on the national state in accordance with the new needs that have arisen. The present rapid growth in the duties and powers of the state, its “authoritarian” regulation and control of business and industry, did not begin with Roosevelt. But it is rapidly coming to the point where quantity changes to quality, where it is beginning to be clearly recognized that the system of individual capitalism, having given way to monopoly finance capitalism, is taking the form of state capitalism. The implications of this process are manifold in relation to the class struggle and the workers’ movement.
In the United States the transformations that catapulted into power as their final outcome a Mussolini and a Hitler in Europe, commence with Roosevelt under the guise of liberalism. The politics of liberalism are possible during the cataclysm of the general world crisis only because of the political backwardness of the American masses, and only so long as the working class remains politically weak, without a strong, active vanguard party. The moment masses of workers rally to such a party, that moment the capitalists can no longer rule behind the screen of liberal democracy and the big bourgeoisie will have to resort to new forms of state power. But it is hardly sufficient to characterize Roosevelt as a liberal without analyzing the philosophy and mode of operation of liberalism itself.
Liberalism accepts the revisionist view of the state as being above, the classes, acting as mediator and buffer between the classes. The liberals believe, for this reason, in government by “experts” (state bureaucrats) who can act in the interests, the common interests, of all, as against the special interests of any single class or “section” of capitalist society. And since the state is to “hold the arena” for the preservation of “fair play” in the class struggle, the liberals are the upholders of bourgeois democracy. We are not concerned at the moment in exposing the hypocrisy and dishonesty of this entire “philosophy”, in showing the impossibility of reconciling the irreconcilable in which liberalism pretends to be engaged. Accepting the system of capitalist exploitation as socially necessary, the liberals theorize in terms of “bourgeois socialism” which aims to eliminate the “evils” of the capitalist mode of production (that is, its glaringly rotten features). Fundamentally they aim to preserve the capitalist system in its bourgeois democratic form.
To preserve capitalism today, to organize society in the form essential for the support of the conditions underlying the capitalist mode of production as against the encroachments of the workers as well as of individual capitalists, the state is forced to intervene more and more directly and on a greater and greater scale. It was the middle class, including the farmers, that placed Roosevelt in the saddle. But the middle class has no independent policies for the solution of capitalist contradictions. So long as it remains under the illusions of bourgeois democracy, it follows the lead of the big bourgeoisie; its representatives and spokesmen carry out, in properly disguised form, the behests of finance capital. Thus under the auspices of the liberal Roosevelt, the state becomes as never before to the same extent the “ideal personification of the total national capital”. This superstructure of capitalism extends its bureaucratic tentacles throughout the vitals of the body politic. Individual initiative gives way to the functioning of salaried state employees operating as “expert” administrators of industry, regulators of production, dictators over the relations between capital and labor, over hours and conditions of work. This process is far from completion, nor could it be completed under the forms of bourgeois democracy.
The process continues without the volition or willingness of the participants or of the individual capitalists. Roosevelt was far from realizing all the consequences of the program of the NRA. That program was necessitated by an “emergency” but emergencies (crises), are integral parts of social evolution, they are focal points hastening the otherwise normal development of society, but in the same direction. There goes on at present a concerted attack on the NRA by the forces of reactionary capitalism that would like to cancel it out, to wipe it from the slate now that its apparent usefulness has passed. But that is more easily said than done, for the NRA is the first step in the direction that capitalist development must take, towards ever greater concentration of power in the national state – before its downfall and disappearance historically. As Engels pointed out, the capitalists fear nothing so much as this development which yields up ultimately their sacrosanct social functions to a salaried bureaucracy, thereby plainly revealing their utter uselessness and their reactionary role as fetters on the means of production. American capitalism, just as its European counterpart, is forced by the exigencies of the crisis and the need to recover profits, to turn to the state for help despite the fact that the more the state helps, the greater the threat to capitalism, for state concentration of power (state capitalism leading towards possible state ownership) tends to bring the class struggle “to a head”.
The ideology of the New Deal, fundamentally liberal opportunism, is not a clear and fixed set of concepts. But in its operation it finds itself continually and apologetically at variance with reality. Richberg, reporting on the present status of the NRA, shows clearly that the building of the “superstate” commenced by the present regime, is not a matter of volition: “The very thing that we in the administration are trying to do is get away from the superstate. We are trying to decentralize problems by balancing forces. We are letting private initiative handle things.” But if private initiative (private property) could have handled things then there would have been no need for an NRA. Like it or not, Roosevelt is paving the way towards a new form of state power. In the period of upturn, and the aftermath of the crisis, Roosevelt has cast for himself the role of mediator between the classes. To carry out this role, Roosevelt relies in turn on wings of the NRA extending to right and to left, on the class collaborationists in the camp of the bosses and those in the camp of the proletariat, on the Johnsons, Harrimans and Swopes on the one hand, and the Perkinses, Greens and Gormans on the other. The role of mediator is possible only if the economic situation does not force an intensification of class warfare to the breaking point between the classes, only while the wings of class collaboration remain intact and do not crumple up. So long as Johnson can persuade the bosses that they have nothing to fear from the NRA, that they will receive the substance and the workers the shadow; so long as the labor lieutenants of capitalism can save face by misleading the working class in sham battles, Roosevelt can disarm the workers and place on their necks the yoke of arbitration. But this gaining of time for the salvation of capitalism solves nothing and acts in fact under conditions that inexorably drive the workers to fight for existence itself, to set the stage for an ever fiercer struggle on a widening arena. Deeper strata of the working class become involved in the conflict and the strikes of whole industries take on the elemental character of natural forces.
The strikes themselves tend to aggravate the economic situation and the instability of capitalism. They therefore stand more and more in the way of Roosevelt’s plans to “force” recovery; strikes become more and more anathema to the bureaucrats who want to balance forces and regulate business for profits. For the working class the strikes above all else act as political lessons, revealing the true nature of Roosevelt and the NRA as well as that of the supporters of class collaboration in the trade union ranks. Thus the NRA itself becomes a precipitant aiding to crystallize out the two major forces striving for power in capitalist society. This crystallization, this molecular process of cleavage, is an indication that the proletariat is learning to rely for the solution of its problems on its own militant action. Once that lesson is learned, the whole system of mediation is challenged, and this in turn becomes a challenge to the capitalist state. Sooner or later Roosevelt, personifying this state, may be compelled to resort to the use of military force to break the resistance of the strikers to the plan of capitalism to solve its problems by loading all the burdens on the backs of the workers. In relation to the capitalists, the NRA is the exercize of the police powers of the state in the interests of the entire class; in relation to the workers the NRA will then become the use of the state’s military force to impose the will of the capitalists. Roosevelt and his Secretary of War, Dern, fear the necessity of resorting to martial law and Federal troops because that will mean the end of class collaboration. The class struggle going on underneath the NRA, will then have remorselessly superseded it and will take its own irresistible course. Roosevelt’s balancing of forces, his attempt to achieve social equilibrium, is doomed to give way to a more deadly use of the state apparatus of repression.
Liberal politics operates within the framework of bourgeois democracy; and bourgeois democracy is a deceptive screen which hides the real relation of forces in capitalist society. This cover or screen will be torn aside when the workers take the road of revolutionary struggle. The mounting wave of strike struggles is the prelude to more militant action, possibly to the revolutionary storm. In this period, when capitalism is forced to support millions of workers and of the middle class instead of the workers and the oppressed petty bourgeoisie supporting and maintaining the capitalists, the big bourgeoisie is undergoing a slow but steady process of weakening by the defection of the middle class. Wide strata of the petty bourgeoisie feel their normal ties with the big bourgeoisie broken. Large sections could be won over to the support of an independent communist party pursuing a correct revolutionary policy, but no such party now exists. Hence desperate elements of the middle class allied with the lumpenproletariat turn for a “solution” of their uprooted situation to Fascism.
Elements and tendencies that advocate extreme measures of force and violence to suppress the trade unions and working class parties, to get rid of bourgeois democracy as well as working class democracy, exist in capitalist society at all times. But normally these elements, these roots of Fascism are held in check by the inter-relationship of class forces. The most reactionary wing of the capitalist class is ready at all times to wage relentless war on the oppressed toilers who dare to fight for better conditions and a greater share of capitalist income. This wing demands the immediate use of the police and military force of the state to put down the rebellious workers. Generally such repressions remain localized and are of short duration. It is only when the struggle begins to take on major proportions, only when it engrosses the entire nation, that the extremists of capitalist reaction gain a wider hearing in their own class. And it is only under conditions of crisis that pauperize and render desperate the middle class that the Fascist tendencies inherent at all times in capitalist society can seek mass support and make a bid for state power. It is in serious sectional conflicts that the Fascist forces begin to recruit and organize before they can close their ranks on a national scale. And it is therefore in these sectional conflicts, already occurring in the United States, that the working class must smash and crush the incipient Fascism by united action.
Let the working class take matters more and more into its own hands – and the whole situation impels it on this path – and Roosevelt, like Bruning in Germany, will be compelled to tolerate the Fascists and even to patronize them, since his main task is to save capitalism. Just as the liberal Wilson, faced with Bolshevism in Europe, was pushed in the World War into the closest alliance with European reaction, so Roosevelt and the liberals, in the national class struggle, will be forced by the threat of proletarian victory, into the camp of reaction.
One cannot predict in advance the stages of the struggles ahead. But it is clear that Roosevelt’s program is building up a stronger and more powerful state structure. This apparatus is designed to meet the needs of capitalist imperialism at home and abroad. The same strengthened military forces being expanded for the purposes of the imperialist war, will also be useful in the suppression of working class resistance at home. The imperialist war is merely the external manifestation of the class struggle. With the trend towards the superstate, it is no accident that military figures, generals, colonels, majors, are found located in strategic positions in industry and politics. For the state will be called upon to exert its police and military powers to a greater and greater degree.
When the state intervenes in the class struggle by the use of its military-police forces to act as “mediator” between the classes, the state appearing, because of the balance of class forces, to be independent of classes, it has taken on the character of Bonapartism, The executive wielding the power of such a state becomes Bonapartist. This stage has not been reached yet in America. Roosevelt is neither Bonapartist nor Fascist. Bonapartism does not and cannot decide the issues of the class struggle, it cuts no Gordian knots. But it precedes, if developments follow the German rather than the Polish sequence, the decisive clash that brings either proletarian victory or the catastrophe of Fascism. By his contribution in building up the state along the lines needed to salvage capitalism in decay, the liberal Roosevelt is paving the way toward Bonapartism. He is giving a Bonapartist tinge to the state. Unless there comes a decisive change in the current of events, – something that we do not visualize at this stage of development – we may look forward to the increasing use of the state’s power for repression.



CAPITALIST peace is an armed truce constantly threatened with being disrupted by the under-handed or overt acts of aggression of one or the other of the imperialist powers. The incident that finally precipitates war is merely the indication that diplomacy, as an instrument for peaceful expansion of the robber interests of finance capital, is powerless when faced with a problem of fundamental contradiction between two national capitalist states. Such a situation has now been reached in the Far East; at any moment the volcanic pressure of productive forces clamoring for expansion in a capitalist world will bring a violent explosion. Whether the next war, for which all countries are feverishly preparing, breaks out in the Pacific zone of conflict first – as seems most probable – is of little consequence, for it will inevitably become world-wide in its scope.
From the point of view of imperialism, the problem of the Pacific is reducible to quite simple terms. On one side of this vast ocean stands the most powerful capitalist nation on earth, the United States, with its tremendous resources and its supreme technique of production. On the other side lies a continent with more than half the world’s population, just beginning to develop, offering a fabulous market for commodities and for capital investment. But in between lies Japan, also seeking, as a matter of life and death for its capitalism, sources of raw materials, markets for its finished goods, fields for investment of finance capital. Japan threatens to subjugate entirely for its own purposes the greatest market still undivided, to make of China a colony, to close the door in the face of United States imperialism. A problem of such vast and profound importance to both these capitalist powers can only be “solved” by war. That has been clear to the ruling classes of both America and Japan ever since the victory of Japan in the Russo-Jap War. It was perfectly clear to Lenin when in October 1920 he granted (what he did not possess) to the American adventurer Washington Vanderlip a seventy-year lease to four hundred thousand square miles of territory, including Kamchatka, to exploit its rich oil, coal and fishery resources. Let the imperialist dogs fight over the bone and leave the Soviet Union alone!
A long history of conflicts between the two Pacific powers leads up to the present situation. It took thirty years for Japan to wrest Manchuria from China and completely shut out all other rivals. America felt this loss keenly. Back in 1906 US Special Agent Clark, sent to Manchuria, reported:
“Manchuria is a very important market for American flour, oil, tobacco, etc. and especially for American cotton piece goods. It is the only section of China in which American piece goods practically monopolize the market ... The trade of Manchuria is of more importance to the US than to any other nation, with the possible exception of Japan.”
It was the Japanese success in closing this trade to the US that led to the Hays’ formulation of the Open Door policy, the only method at the time by which American capitalism could oppose Japanese penetration. Needless to say, American imperialism would be the first to violate this policy if it secured the upper hand. The Japanese capitalists consistently bow to this policy in words, the better to violate it in deeds by the methods of railway rebates to Japanese business, by the prompt delivery of Japanese goods and the holding up of foreign goods on the railroads, by the forgery of trade marks, by the opening of mail and cables, by the use of diplomatic pouches to dodge taxes, – in short, by all the tricky methods taught by American and world capitalism.
The ousting of American business from Manchuria raised a storm of obloquy in the American press against all things Japanese. In San Francisco Japanese children were excluded from the ordinary schools and were forced to attend special schools for Orientals. Japanese resentment over this caused Theodore Roosevelt to send the US fleet into the Pacific in 1908 for a “tour” of the world, in precisely the same fashion as the present Roosevelt sent the fleet to Hawaii recently upon the final seizure of Manchuria. The friction over immigration finally resulted in the “Gentlemen’s Agreement” of 1912 by which the Japanese agreed to withhold passports from laborers on condition that no exclusion law were passed. But the US violated this agreement when the California Alien Land Law of 1920, preventing Japanese from owning land, and the Supreme Court decision shutting the Japanese out from becoming citizens, led up to the Exclusion Law of 1924.
The conflict over loans and railways in China presents a Gordian knot in the economic battle for supremacy in the Far East. The American railway magnate, Harriman, tried to purchase the South Manchurian railway in 1905. This attempt proving futile, Secretary Knox then tried to “neutralize” Manchuria by making its railways “international”, a move the only result of which was to bring about a secret partitioning of Manchuria between Czarist Russia and Japan. In 1913 came the attempt to grant an international loan to China for the purpose of building a rival railway to the South-Manchurian in Shantung. The State department in 1919 approved the “consortium” for loans to China. In every case, however, Japan has outmanoeuvred United States imperialism in this sphere.
The World War intensified the struggle for mastery of the Pacific. The United States opposed the infamous 21 demands forced by Japanese imperialism on China in 1915, and the attempt of Japan to seize the Siberian Maritime Provinces in the 1918-1921 intervention. Owing to American cable and wireless interests the United States opposed the ceding of the Island of Yap to Japan as a “mandate” after the war. American militarism saw with dismay the handing over to Japan of the strategic Caroline and Marshall Islands and there has been constant friction over the secret building of naval bases in these islands.
The Washington Conference of 1921-2 served to emphasize the American policy of watchful waiting and of slow retreat before the aggressiveness of Japanese militarism. The purposes of American diplomacy at that conference were to limit naval armaments, particularly Japanese, to bring about the cancellation of the Anglo-Japanese Alliance then up for renewal, to attempt a settlement of troublesome Pacific Island questions and to obstruct Japanese imperialism in China and Siberia. Although Japan retreated from Siberia and yielded on the 5-5-3 capital ship ratio, she forced the US to forego fortification of the Pacific possessions beyond Hawaii and virtually forced a recognition of accomplished facts in China. Thus the Tsingtao-Tsinan Railway, seized by Japan in Shantung in 1915 and giving complete control to that province, remained in Japanese hands with a promise, never kept, to return it when “redeemed”. Japan has never repudiated, and recent events have demonstrated this amply, the 21 demands that Would make China completely a colony.
Has the Anglo-Japanese Alliance actually been broken? England entered into this alliance in 1902 because of the rise of industrial Germany and the naval race with German imperialism. Threatened with a German fleet in the North Sea and at the same time with a Czarist Russian thrust toward India in Asia, England was forced to concentrate her fleet in home waters and to permit the Japanese fleet to police the Pacific for her. In return the Japanese ruling class was given a free hand in North China. But with the post-war developments, Japan has become as much a threat to England as Germany or America. The Japanese Monroe Doctrine for Asia applies no less to England than to America. The British do not forget such statements as “the greater the consideration paid by Japan to India, the more should be the British concessions to Japan as regards China” in the Japanese press (Nippon-Ayobi-Nipponjin) or the famous statement of Colonel Misumachi to the Canadian missionaries in Chientao in which he warned them that Japan might give aid to the non-coöperation movement in India. To England mastery of China by either America or Japan means as a next step breaking of England’s strangle-hold on South China and loss of India.
The British colonies, Canada, South Africa, New Zealand and Australia, understand and fear this fact. England is faced with the dilemma that aid to Japan against the US in order to save her colonies from the American colossus may result in desertion by those very colonies – always outspoken against the Anglo-Jap Alliance. Thus D. Massey, when Prime Minister of New Zealand, declared that a war between England and the US would “smash the Empire into smithereens”. Similarly Hughes, as Prime Minister of Australia, stated that “he greeted with joy every battleship laid down in an American shipyard”. These alarmists of the Yellow Peril are themselves the greatest menace to the masses as the White capitalist Peril at home. But England has taken precautions and, on the advice of Admiral Jellicoe, has established the most powerful naval bases in the South China Seas, notably at Singapore and Colombo. Japanese diplomacy has aimed recently at balancing the US with England when the Japanese armies finally move on Siberia. In view of the intense rivalry in trade of Japanese capitalism with the English textile interests and the threat to British possessions by either victorious power, it is possible that England will remain neutral and attempt to capture the world’s trade during the conflict just as America and Japan did in the last war.
Even before America entered that last World War the US ruling class was already engaged in preparations for the next conflict, with Japan. Having captured the world market, American capitalism intended to maintain its hegemony after the war. Hence arose the Big Navy propaganda in 1916 when the US Congress inaugurated its three-year plan for building the largest navy in the world. President Wilson spoke for “incomparably the most adequate navy in the world”. In 1920 the Report of the General Board of the Navy stated the aim of creating “a navy equal to the most powerful maintained by any other nation in the world”. Japan was at the same time engaged in a naval race. The budgets of both countries set aside naval appropriations vastly in excess of any the world had hitherto seen. The Washington Conference arrested this race for a few years in its acutest form, but the present naval programs indicate that a “crisis” has arrived and that no more limitations will be acceptable.
Why has this “crisis” taken so long to mature? Why has not the US with its incomparably superior technology, come to grips sooner with its Japanese rivals? The answer lies in the immense distances involved in warfare in the Pacific. Unlike the World War, decided mainly by armies entrenched on land, this war concerns navies and naval strategy. The US could not send millions of soldiers overseas, nor could it support them if they could be sent. Unlike England, America has no first class naval base on the mainland of Asia. The radius of battle for the complex mechanism of a modern navy is dependent on the distance from such fueling and repair bases. In the last war this radius was five hundred miles and the US has no base nearer than five thousand miles from the scene of conflict, – Pearl Harbor in Honolulu. The Philippine Islands have several naval bases not very strongly fortified but even if well fortified the Japanese navy could very quickly seize these islands before the US could send sufficient forces to defend them. Even so the American militarists will hardly abandon the Philippines to be taken over immediately by Japan. The proposed “independence” of the islands is put ten years hence – and a good deal will happen in those ten years. Meantime the strategy of Japan has been directed towards complete control of all the sea lanes of the Western Pacific with the double view of exercizing complete mastery of Chinese trade and of making enclosed, well-protected inland seas of the waters adjacent to Japan and China. By keeping the route to Manchuria open, and to China, Japan can secure all that she needs in foodstuffs, coal and iron ore, etc. On her own soil the Island Kingdom is almost completely lacking in raw materials that arc absolutely essential to the conducting of war for any protracted period. The cutting of communications with Manchuria and China would be fatal to Japanese militarism, just as it would prove fatal for any Japanese armies left stranded in Manchuria without supplies from the home country.
It is precisely these reasons that caused the US to recognize the Soviet Union. Only an ally, a strong ally on the mainland, can assure victory to the United States, either through weakening Japan in preliminary warfare, or through a combined attack. Siberia would offer excellent air bases for raids on Japanese industrial centers such as Yawata Arsenal, so essential to Japanese militarism. The United States navy, following the northern route from Alaska along the Aleutians, could escape the submarine perils that would beset it along 2,000 miles of its course if it followed the lane parallel with the secretly prepared Caroline and Marshall Islands, veritable Japanese submarine nests. Soviet submarines could in turn threaten the Japanese lines of communication. From every point of view, as Radek pointed out long ago, American imperialism needs the aid of Soviet Russia. The Soviet Union, defending itself against imperialist attack, could utilize the contradictions in the camp of its imperialist enemies. The Japanese imperialists, faced with the threat of an alliance between two such enemies, was forced immediately to postpone its impending attack on the Maritime Provinces and Siberia.
But further postponement means further endangering the possibility of Japanese success. For Siberia is being rapidly colonized and built up into a very strong agrarian-industrial unit. Just as the Japanese were forced to take steps to seize Manchuria because of the tremendous influx of Chinese, thirty million of them, into a land that Japan hoped to use for colonization by her own people, so she will now be forced to act in Siberia before it is too late. But the US too can no longer afford to put off staking its fortunes on the sword. The vast surplus of commodities and of capital piled up by the most advanced capitalism in the world must seek an outlet beyond the national boundaries. The contradiction of overproduction by rapidly expanding forces of production, US capitalism hopes to solve in the world market by a redivision of that market. The crisis drives America, the hardest hit and the slowest to recover, inevitably on this adventurist road. Thus history may show the “combined” development of imperialist war between capitalist powers with a war of intervention against the Soviet Union starting in the East. But such a war will inevitably precipitate out all the contradictions between all the capitalist countries, and resolve also the fundamental contradiction of our epoch, that between a socialist system of society and the capitalist system. That solution depends, however, not on the desires of the imperialist bandits of capitalism, but on the masses of all countries.
The epoch of imperialism is the epoch of the deadline of capitalism, the era of wars and revolutions. The fierce competition in a world of ever more restricted markets means above all an unbearably intense exploitation of the masses of workers and farmers, a sharp lowering of the living standards of the toilers and the petty bourgeoisie. The largest war budgets are loaded on the backs of the toilers even while they starve, even while tens of millions are unemployed and unable to secure adequate relief. To carry through the program of imperialist war and plunder abroad requires a regime of reaction at home to suppress all opposition to the murderous schemes of big business. Bonapartism and Fascism are the inevitable concomitants of a regime of reactionary finance capital. The preparations at home for the program of imperialism abroad are not only technical, the mobilization of all industry for the war machine, but social in that all the elements of democracy, bourgeois and proletarian, must be suppressed to assure a smoothened path for dictatorial capitalism. In truth, far from “solving” any problem of livelihood for the masses, war means that they have everything to lose.
The way out of the all-embracing contradictions of modern capitalism is not along the road of imperialist war and its consequent redivision of the world, but by the advance of civilization to a new and higher plane through the hegemony of the proletariat. War is as much an attack on the working class at home as on the “enemy” abroad by the home bourgeoisie. If civilization is not to be destroyed in flames, if the masses are not to sink back into barbarism, then the machinations of the imperialist scoundrels must be resisted by the workers and farmers. The imperialist war must be turned into civil war! The working class must be taught to distrust all forms of justification for war, all manoeuvres to bring about “civil peace” before and during war. The first aim of the class struggle today must be to resist by mass action all attacks on workers’ democracy, on the trade unions, on the working class parties, because these Fascist blows mean the prelude to incalculable misery for all toilers, because they are the first step towards imperialist war. On the other hand, war itself will be used to further the interests of reactionary capitalism by giving greater impetus to the Fascist program.
Japanese capitalism and American capitalism rest on the volcano of the social crisis. At the first touch of war the Japanese peasants led by the workers may rise up against intolerable oppression, for Japan resembles nothing so much as Czarist Russia before the revolution. But in America, too, the masses face intolerable conditions, becoming ever more oppressive. The way out is not through war but through the dictatorship of the proletariat leading all the oppressed. We revolutionary workers of America greet our Japanese brothers; we shall extend our hands across the sea to the oppressed of Japan even during the war that inevitably approaches. Long live the solidarity of the international working class!



There has finally appeared an honest-to-goodness translation of the document of the Russian economists on the teaching of political economy in the Soviet Union. Poor Russian professors! The GPU sets strict limits to the sphere within which they may theorize. With the richest Marxist literature once at their command in the land of “socialism” and planned economy, they are reduced to timid quotations from the spurious pearls of wisdom found in the drab writings of the autocrat of all the Russians. Their science is commanded to justify the glaring inequalities that have been introduced into Soviet society by the self-interested bureaucracy. They leave it to their petty bourgeois American colleagues to carry on a lively discussion concerning whether it is socialism or capitalism that now exists in the Soviet Union. Academic freedom exists even less than other freedoms in Stalin’s Russia.
The bloody purges in the most prolonged series of political mock trials in all history have not served to encourage lively creation in the field of political economy. This subject is in fact the most touchy of all to the Kremlin. What better proof is needed than the statement in the document of Leontiev that “The teaching of political economy in our institutions of higher learning has been resumed after an interruption of a few years.” It has been reinstated only in the last academic year. It was not the war that caused this lapse. It was the need to purge learning along with everything else, the need to seize and put under lock and key more Marxist (that is, dangerous) literature. But if the economic theories of Marx and Engels are taboo, what then to teach and remain out of the concentration camp? It is truly difficult to be a professor under such conditions, even a Stalinist professor.
The American professors, without any difficulty at all, accept as quite normal the conditions under which their Russian counterparts have to exist. There is Professor Normano, for example, who assures us that nothing new is taking place (only forgetting, by accident, to tell us about the old).
“The characteristic of the post-revolution period in Russia was action and not theorizing, and even theoretical changes took place by way of action—in some cases being later acknowledged by theoretical pronunciamentos.”
The whole function of a science is to guide action by theory, not merely to remain immersed in empirical observations. What is clear is that the professor does not believe in his own science. Or perhaps he is warning his prying fellow-teachers not to throw too much light on what is happening, that the “administrative action” of the Stalinists will in due course restore capitalism in Russia without any prodding from those eagerly awaiting this outcome.
 
Stalinist “Science”
Leontiev and the others feel their safest course is to justify what is and therefore to give it the proper Stalinist coloration. They base their “science” on Stalin’s formula: “From each according to his ability, to each according to his work.” It would be treason to do less, for this doctrine is actually in the Stalinist Constitution as the basis of socialism, the first stage of communism. It was under this formula that the bureaucracy introduced piecework and the Stakhanovist speed-up in their attempt to increase the woefully low Russian productivity of labor. The appeal to the money incentive and the use of every device of bureaucratic coercion are contained in this formula. It is, as is well known, a perversion of the Marxist description of communist society: “From each according to his ability, to each according to his needs.” The two statements have almost nothing in common with each other. To say that Stalin’s crass formulation is the basic tenet of socialism, is to cast utter discredit on socialism.
Is it socialism that exists in the Soviet Union? Only one blissfully ignorant of Marxism, or deliberately falsifying (as does the Kremlin dictator) could say so. The proletarian revolution even when it occurs in the most advanced capitalist country, will not establish socialism at once. It will create rather the possibility of moving towards socialism, and certainly at a far more rapid rate than was possible in backward Russia. Nobody foresaw in advance that the proletarian revolution would succeed first of all in culturally and economically backward Russia. Marx and Engels naturally theorized concerning what socialism would look like in the future. To make clear how socialism would be built, what it would do for humanity, Marx started with the most advanced stage reached by capitalism and thought ahead from that. Not that he considered that the workers must of necessity first take power in an advanced country. He thought at one time, in fact, that the revolution might break out in Russia first of all. Elsewhere, showing his conception of the socialist transformation of society as a world matter, he remarks that the French would begin the revolution, the Germans continue and deepen it, the English—with the most advanced technique in his day—finish it.
 
Marx’s Position
The seizure of power by the Russian workers placed on their shoulders the tasks performed in other lands by the bourgeoisie. Thus the Russian Revolution illustrated the application of socialist methods to solve capitalist problems. The Soviet state was required to expand the forces of production, not on the base of an advanced technique, but from the ground up. True the Russians could borrow the most advanced techniques, but they could borrow them only at a rate determined by the forces already at their disposal, including an extreme lack of trained labor power in a peasant country, poverty, and a backward economy and culture. The revolution in the forms of property — the nationalizing of the land and the factories, the monopolizing of transport and trade—did not begin to solve the problem of building socialism. All that it did was to place the problem for solution on the order of the day, in life as Trotsky says.
Marx in viewing the problem as it would arise not in a backward land but in the most advanced, had seen clearly that society would have to go through a long transition period. He even distinguished between the earlier phase of this period and the later. Socialism, the first phase of the transformation, would usher in a period of growth of the forces of production over and beyond anything that had previously been seen in the capitalist countries. The standard of living would rise continually in this period. This period would give way at a time when society was producing extremely cheaply a great abundance of everything, so that all want had disappeared, to the final stage of communism. Work would then be done directly for society; it would be considered normal and necessary; it would be performed voluntarily, each giving the best of his creative ability. Only then would “each give according to his ability and receive according to his needs.”
Socialism is a higher civilization than capitalism in every respect. Yet Marx declared that even under socialism, as it emerges from capitalist society, society would still be filled with much of the content of the old bourgeois structure.
“Bourgeois law ... is inevitable in the first phase of the communist society, in that form in which it issues alfter long labor pains from capitalist society. Law can never be higher than the economic structure and the cultural development of society conditioned by that structure.”
Lenin based his theory of the state on this dictum of Marx. Since society does not yet produce enough of everything for all, the sphere of distribution and consumption must still be regulated in a bourgeois manner. Man has not yet sloughed off his old habits and become a communist by nature. The forces of production will be built to greater heights in the first stage by giving people an incentive in the sphere of consumption. In short money and the law of value will still rule society. This being the case said Lenin:
“Bourgeois law in relation to the distribution of the objects of consumption assumes, of course, inevitably a bourgeois state, for law is nothing without an apparatus capable of compelling observance of its norms. It follows that under communism (Lenin speaks here of the early period) not only will bourgeois law survive for a certain time, but also even a bourgeois state without the bourgeoisie.”
Russia started at the lowest rung of the ladder, where terrible want was and still is prevalent. The planning of economy, proposed first by Trotsky, was intended in the first instance to try to catch up as rapidly as possible to capitalist production. This has not been achieved if we take economy as a whole. The war has now set Russia back by its devastation of town and countryside. The low level of production of consumers’ goods could not be better illustrated than in the warning given to Soviet soldiers invading Rumania not to be “deceived” by the “glitter” of capitalist civilization! This in so frightfully backward a country as Rumania! How, then, can one talk of “socialism” in Russia? But isn’t it true that the industries are nationalized, and isn’t there a monopoly of foreign trade in the Soviet Union, and isn’t this socialism? It has been pointed out that these factors are necessary for socialism but are not yet socialism. Russia is not and never was a socialist society Trotsky calls Russia a transition society between capitalism and socialism. Materially Soviet society remains nearer to capitalism than to socialism. And not only materially!
The Russian workers are still paid wages for their labor power, more especially for piecework. This means that they are subject to bourgeois law, and more especially to the bourgeois law of value. Money and the law of value remain part of civilization up to the final stage of communism. They continue to perform a function after the downfall of capitalism, that this system of society could not carry out; namely, drawing into the main stream of social life and encouraging the development of everything primitive and backward on a world-scale.
Marx pointed out in his Critique of the Gotha Program that the law of wages remains the same after the downfall of capitalism as before.
“Here obviously the same principle prevails as that which regulates the exchange of commodities so far as this exchange is of equal values. Content and form are changed because under the changed conditions no one can contribute anything except his labor and, on the other hand, nothing can pass into the possession of individuals except individual objects of consumption. But, so far as the distribution of the latter among the individual producers is concerned, the same principle prevails as in the exchange of commodity-equivalents; i.e., equal quantities of labor in one form are exchanged for equal quantities of labor in another form.”
There follows a remark which the Stalinist professors dare not quote when they discuss this question:
“The equal right is here still based on the same principle as bourgeois right, although principle and practice are no longer at daggers drawn, while the exchange of equivalents in commodity exchange only exists for the average and not for the individual case. In spite of this advance, this equal right is still continually handicapped by bourgeois limitations ... This equality consists in the fact that everything is measured by an equal measure, labor ... This equal right is an unequal right for unequal work. It recognizes no class differences because every worker ranks as a worker like his fellows, but it tacitly recognizes unequal individual endowment, and thus capacities for production, as natural privileges.”
The professors would like to forget that Marx designates this not as a socialist, but as a bourgeois law.
 
Falsification of Marxism
The Stalinists use these quotations from Marx to “justify” not mere inequality in wages, but the tremendous inequalities that the parasitic bureaucracy has introduced into Soviet life. They falsify Marxism. Lenin points out that to Marx this inequality, while unavoidable at first, is still a “defect.” Lenin adds:
“Until the higher phase of communism arrives, the Socialists demand the strictest control, by society and by the state, of the quantity of labor and the quantity of consumption; only this control must start with the expropriation of the capitalists, with the control of the workers over the capitalists, and must be carried out, not by a state of bureaucrats, but by a state of armed workers.”
Lenin followed Marx and Engels on the measures to be taken by the proletariat against the formation of a bureaucracy in the new state. Their desire was to minimize inequality in order to prevent the danger of a return to capitalism. Democracy, complete democracy, in both the economic and the political spheres was necessary for this purpose. That is why Lenin demanded not only regular elections but recall at any time, payment for officials no higher than the wages of a worker, and an immediate transition to a regime in which all will fulfill the functions of control and supervision so that “all may for a time become bureaucrats, and therefore nobody can become a bureaucrat.”
Stalin set the tone for the justification of inequality in an interview with Emil Ludwig (“the court portraitist”) in 1932. Speaking of Marx’s criticism of Stirner for his equalitarianism, the dictator said:
“Equalitarianism arises from the peasant mode of thought, the psychology of dividing up everything equally, the psychology of primitive peasant ‘communism.’ Equalitarianism has nothing in common with Marxist socialism. Only people who have no knowledge of Marxism can think of things in such a primitive way, as if the Russian Bolsheviks wanted to gather all wealth together and then divide it up equally.”
This sounds at first sight as though it had some merit — but everything in its time and place. The real question then concerned not primitive peasants, but the relatively enormous share that the parasitic bureaucracy was bleeding from the national income. And on this score there could be no doubt as to where the Marxists stood.
The professors of political economy—it seems incredible!—take Stalin quite literally and in 1944 speak of the incorrectness of idealizing primitive communism, the primitive communism of ancient times. The “equalitarianism” of that epoch, they tell us without batting an eyelash, was really due to weakness and backwardness. Civilization took progressive steps away from all that. Perhaps the professors feel it may be safe to go back at least that far in their criticism. But in today’s reality even this has its function. It is not too difficult to see here and elsewhere the tendency to cast doubt on the merits of communism. After all it is better to keep one’s face turned in the direction in which one is going, rather than in the opposite direction. There is also the Soviet General in Iran who replied to a correspondent’s question that “Communism—that was something for perhaps a thousand years from now.” Perhaps the General thought that Stalin’s system would last that same thousand years that Hitler so well forecast for his own.
 
Economic Laws
The analysis thus far permits us to evaluate properly the inevitable diatribe against “enemies of socialism of various brands — bourgeois economist wreckers, restorers of capitalism from the camp of the Trotskyist-Bukharinist agency of fascism” who
“... have tried to extend to socialist economy the laws of capitalist economy. To suit their wrecking, counter-revolutionary purposes they have slanderously perverted the character of the socialist relations that have been introduced among us, falsifying them, repainting them in the colors of capitalist relations—spreading the pitiable fiction that the very same unchanged laws of capitalist economy which prevailed before, operate also under the Soviet power, and any attempt to break these laws can only lead to economic convulsions.”
Too bad that the professors, the self-same ones who invented the theory with Stalin that the ruble no longer needed gold coverage and no longer had the same meaning as in capitalist countries, and who maintained that prices could be administratively set—almost at will—by the bureaucracy, too bad that after some experience with inflationary convulsions they must now conclude precisely with what they claim to be denying. The law of value does apply, they tell us, to “socialist” society. The self-same law that exists under capitalism. Just as the “socialist principle” is seen to be nothing more nor less than the “capitalist principle.” From each according to his ability, to each according to his work. The New York Times will subscribe to that with both hands and precisely because it does, it maintains that socialism has now been abandoned in Russia and capitalism restored. Of course it bases itself on more than the mere formula!
Both parts of this formula are false. The masses in Russia are driven to the utmost in their toil. Their labor is forced from them on penalty of starving otherwise, just as under capitalism. The piecework system, as Trotsky says, forces men to strain themselves to the utmost without any visible coercion. To each according to his work. That is the bourgeois law of value which remains for a time even under socialism.
The Stalinist economists state quite correctly that the law of the average rate of profit has lost it significance. But what was this significance? The average rate of profit under capitalism distributed the national surplus value gained in exploitation, in shares to the individual capitalists proportional to the amount invested. Surplus value does not disappear in the transition society or under socialism. The state appropriates all surplus value. Under ideal conditions this would be used for capital investments to build the forces of production and for raising the living standards of the masses, as well as for ordinary administrative expenses of the state. This is still a half-way house insofar as property is concerned. Private property, we know, must pass through the state property stage in order at a later time to really become socialized. When it becomes socialized, the state will no longer be necessary and will wither away. Russian economy is in the state stage, not at all the same as the socialist stage.
The low level of productivity of Russian labor combined with the failure of the proletarian revolution to spread, permitted the bureaucracy to consolidate its totalitarian power in the Soviet Union. It goes without saying that this important fact will not be found in the “theoretic” work of the professors. The bureaucracy has long been the worst menace to the Soviet state and economy. It is not the workers who benefit from the nationalized property, but the Stalinist parasites. The whole structure with all its institutions has long been completely “bourgeoisified.” There remains the form of nationalized factories and the monopoly of foreign trade. The growth in inequality, the gulf between the directors of trusts, the technical personnel and the bureaucracy in general on one side, and the toilers on the other, brought about by the operation of the “socialist principle” as well as usurped privileges, has corroded the entire system. Trotsky says in his book on Stalin, “The Stalinist bureaucracy is nothing else but the first stage of bourgeois restoration.”
The professors cannot help but reveal the breaches that have been made. Deep inroads exist in the nationalized land. The peasants have now used their private plots, separated from the collectivized farms, for many years. They look upon these as private property and secure the larger part of their income from the labor devoted to these plots of land. Then too the produce thus privately raised as well as the supplies of grain, etc. received in kind as their share of the production of the collectives, are sold in the open market existing side by side with the closed government market. The economists cannot help but state that: “Between the organized market, which is in the hands of the Soviet state, and the free market element a struggle goes on.” The free market has grown at an enormous rate during the war. The government had to permit this in order to give the incentive for the greatest possible production. Where two markets exist, one for private trading, with much higher prices in the free market, there can be no doubt that speculation and middlemen spring up and grow apace. What part the bureaucracy itself plays in the way of graft and self-enrichment, not to say through outright robbery, we shall probably learn in due course. Leontiev admits that “two sorts of prices exist in fact in Soviet economy.” He makes no further attempt to explain this.
One can say with utmost assurance that in the tug-of-war between the socialist and the capitalist sectors of Soviet economy, the pull is all in the direction of capitalism at the present time. This despite the fact of war production on the part of the trusts. For even in this sphere, the individual factories have come more and more into touch with each other directly, instead of through central planning bodies. This trend has been encouraged by the bureaucracy. Its tendency is to atomize the economy. Taken in conjunction with the direct effects of the war, and the pressure of world imperialism, the danger of capitalist restoration in the Soviet Union grows more and more acute. The process is not one that occurs all at once. The example of “Soviet” Esthonia may be taken as an illustration of how the process may spread. There the land has not been nationalized, but has been left in the hands of the peasants. No effort is being made (nor could it be made under present conditions) to collectivize them. But in addition all enterprises employing less than ten people are permitted to continue as private ones. Only the bigger plants are being nationalized.
There is some indication of the future trend also in the Gold Conference. Stalin has undertaken to help buttress world capitalism with the aid of Soviet gold and economy. The capitalist countries, meantime, propose to seek to penetrate Soviet economy by economic pressure through this same channel.
Incidentally, by these ties with world capitalism, Stalin has negated the whole theory of “socialism in one country.” For it is clear acknowledgement of the dependence of Soviet economy on world economy.
There is only one great force that can save the Soviet Union from this danger. Without a proletarian revolution in Europe, which will arouse the Soviet masses into action against the reactionary bureaucracy, capitalist restoration is inevitable sooner or later. Stalin’s victories do not at all lessen the danger. They may indeed hasten matters. These are the alternatives facing Russia.
 



The corrosion of the very foundations of the Soviet Union by the Stalinist police regime is increasingly exposed to view by the wave of trials. These trials occur with such almost monotonous regularity that one picks up the paper wondering only who Stalin’s next victims will be. But even for the least class-conscious worker there emerges from the news the conviction that the Soviet. Union is passing through a severe and deep-going crisis. The very mass nature of the trials, their wholesale character, the systematic pattern which they all follow, lay bare not only the reality of the crisis, but its nature as well.
The bureaucratic methods of planning and the usurpation of special privileges by the Stalinist ruling caste have brought Russian economy to the brink of disaster. How explain the fact, after reporting such resounding successes in the fulfillment of the five year plans, that production in such varied and important industries as coal, oil, pig iron production, cement, lumber, textiles, should not only be lagging behind the norms set for them, but in many instances should be considerably below the figures reported for the year 1936? A similar situation exists in the agricultural field, fruit, vegetables, sugar, cotton, flax, butter and margarine showing alarming drops.
 
Stalin’s Alibi
Stalin has an infallible explanation, which has “worked” by and large up till now. It is the work of Trotskyist wreckers and scoundrels from the right and from the left (some are already included from the center, Stalinists from beginning to end!). Such scapegoats serve a double purpose for Stalin: they divert attention from the real culprits in the Kremlin and, so Stalin hopes, allay the discontent among the masses by punishing the ones supposedly responsible for goods shortages and for the unbearable living conditions of the workers and peasants.
It us impossible to give more than a brief summary of some of the cases reported in the press recently. Most of the trials, even that small number that reaches the press of the outside world, are held (if they are held at all!) behind closed doors. Rarely is the public admitted to the courtroom and that only when some spectacular, and therefore all the more unconvincing, confession has been extorted from some unfortunate prisoner. Then a “show” can be made of the trial.
 
Some Recent Trials
Thus the press of August 27 report, that “A Show Trial Is Being Made of Seven Important Agricultural Executives in a Leningrad Province near the Finnish Border”. In this case Chief Agronomist Samokhvalov confessed to disruption of collective farming by false planning to reduce yields, all for the purpose of seeing capitalism restored. One Tarasink, Chairman of the District Executive Committee of the CP, confessed that he led a group of Rightists since 1935 in a campaign to disrupt collective agriculture. In resolutions demanding the death penalty for these executives, significantly enough, the demand is also made for the death of Bukharin, their “real” leader!
On Aug. 20 eight people were shot for “Trotskyist counter-revolutionary activities in two factories”. On Aug. 12 we learn that the lumber industry is chock full of enemies of the people some of whom have been executed for sabotage. The Civil Aviation Administration is also honey-combed with “enemies of the people” and numerous engineers and executives have been dismissed and arrested, including the recently appointed head Petrozhitsky. At Azov in the Black Sea Region 13 veterinarians and minor agricultural functionaries were placed on trial for spreading disease among cattle in order to disrupt the economy. These disrupters were, naturally, in contact with Trotskyists.
 
Far Eastern Trials
In the Far East the Military Tribunals have been extremely active. No doubt many spies are at work in Siberia, particularly along the border and along the railroads. But we will perhaps never know how many of those who were shot, allegedly as spies were in actuality merely scapegoats or really revolutionists in unyielding opposition to the present bloody regime. For all these trials are shot through and through with the clumsy attempts at amalgams of real scoundrels with framed-up oppositionist victims. The press of July 5 reports laconically that 22 more were executed as spies in the Far East. On July 8 we learn that 64 more were shot, etc. Some of these “spies” were accused of sabotage, on the Trans-Siberian Railroad, some of sabotage of gold production. The Orsk Gold Trust in the Urals is raked over the coals for being run by Trotskyists who reported a higher production of gold than was actually achieved!
 
The National Problem
The Stalinist bureaucracy acts as the greatest disrupter not only of the economic system but of the political and social system in the USSR. The completely democratic methods of the October Revolution in the handling of the national question served to tie the national republics firmly together in a close economic union. Stalinism acts as a centrifugal force, driving them apart.
Evidence of this is clear in the trials and executions in the outlying, republics. It is nothing new for Stalin, the Georgian, to act, in the fashion of a Great Russian oppressor of nationalities. When Stalin and Erdjonikidze first removed Mdivani from his leading post in Georgia in 1922–3 Lenin, even though on a sick-bed, entered into a fierce controversy against Stalin precisely on this score. Now on July 13 of this year Stalin takes his final revenge. After a closed trial Mdivani and 7 others are executed as terrorists and conspiratorial plotters.
Similarly whole executive committees, heads of the republic, are removed in such places as Uzbekistan and Kazakstan for resisting the adventurist agricultural plans of the bureaucrats who would have caused wholesale starvation of the local peasants in order to make a “showing” in their particular sector of planned economy. Most recently Tursun Khodpieff, Commissar of Domestic Trade, has been removed in Uzbekistan. The utter disregard of national rights and of the peculiarities of local economy have brought about a tense situation in the smaller republics which Stalin seeks to “liquidate” by the methods of bureaucratic terrorism.
Since the liquidation of Mdivani, a further drive has been made against the Georgians. Eleven minor executives are doomed as a Rightist organization which sabotaged and disrupted socialized agriculture and ordered an armed rebellion and assassinations in Georgia. No doubt the resulting trials will include “confessions” to besmirch the name of Mdivani. Already one Zitlidze, former leader of the Signakh regional committee of the CP, has confessed terrorist orders from the premier Mgaloglishvili, removed from office in June, and from the vice-premier Agnyashvili.
 
Some Revealing Trials
Stalin must stop the mouths of all those who are capable of revealing the truth about the frame-ups, whether that involves the death of a Yagoda, one of those mainly responsible and “in the know”, or of some obscure relative of a Gamarnick or Tukhachevsky who knows the truth and can prove the falsehood. But as the circle widens the number of such people becomes legion and Stalin’s task becomes utterly impossible. The truth will out!
Some of the trials take on a macabre comic air. There is the case of the Izvestia editorial writer Suvinsky. Evidently he either took the matter of sabotage seriously or pretended so. When certain bureaucrats in the Saratov region hastened to charge the farm workers with deliberate sabotage (thereby getting the jump on some of these workers who might have been inclined to reverse the charge) Suvinsky defended the maligned workers against the heads of the collectives, saying that they were raising the cry of sabotage to cover their own inefficiency. This was too much for the bureaucracy. It touched home too closely and involved by generalization an expose of the entire bureaucracy. Hence Suvinsky was hastily removed and arrested.
The motive behind the attack made on the Young Guard Publishing House, producing works for youth, is transparent also. It is stated that the Director Leschiner, is a friend of Feinberg, recently removed from the Central Executive Committee of the YCL. That is surely reason enough for removing him. But we learn of a far more important motive: the director of the division of history had spent a whole year writing a biography on Tukhachevsky. Could this have been anything but laudatory? What a danger for the youth to know the truth about the brilliant Tukhachevsky!
 
Economy & Bureaucracy
In the early stages of planned economy, the bureaucracy, despite all its inefficiency and adventurism, could play a certain “progressive” role by acting to achieve the plans set. The only method they knew, however, was to whip the workers and peasants into over-exhausting and underpaid labor. The speed-up system in its worst forms was adopted quite naturally by the “fists” put in charge of industry. The extreme top layers put added pressure on the layers just below in order to have them apply the proper pressure to the lowest strata. When the pressure became too great and lack of fulfillment might easily lead to the prison cell, if not worse, the lesser bureaucrats and those further up defended themselves by falsifying the accounts to make things appear more rosy. In the present period the mass of falsification of accounts is reacting sharply against the whole system of planning. The plans were laid on the basis of the swollen figures and were therefore bound to be at variance with the possibilities. Instead of the amount of coal or cotton figured to enter into the various fields of production, less was available. The top layer of the bureaucracy, which was primarily responsible for creating this situation by its methods, then turned on the lower layers in a fury for having in part misled it. But in doing this, arresting thousands of experts and specialists for “sabotage”, the bureaucracy merely disrupted economy all the more by removing (in the process of choosing scapegoats) the ones best acquainted with the industry. Thus we see this peculiar contradiction: the wholesale arrest of scapegoats, and at the same the attempt to reassure these same elements when they are paralyzed by fear and really sabotage by refusing to take any initiative. Thus on July 27 the Donetz Basin coal industry had been so disrupted by the imprisonment of so many of the technicians, that 445 of these specialists had to be released from prison for “false arrest” to try and straighten matters out. Stalin learned that the method of choosing scapegoats has its limits!
Nevertheless the bureaucracy can only continue to act in the fashion of a whip. It can in no sense evoke the initiative that has become essential for the carrying on of planned production by the masses. Such initiative can only be exerted against the bureaucracy and in antagonism to it. Precisely because of that the Stalinist bureaucracy has become a tremendous brake on the forces of production. It is also, of course, a tremendous overhead. Not only by its recognized privileges but by the bribery and corruption, and above all by the diverting of all sorts of raw material and finished products for its own purposes. The Stalinist bureaucracy are the true “diversionists”!
 
Hidden Strikes
The masses are beginning to realize that the bureaucracy stands in the way. Under the present apparatus of suppression the workers have not yet managed to organize themselves independently and to strike against the bureaucracy. But the mass walkouts in many plants, the tremendous turnovers of labor, take on the character not merely of individual resentment against low wages and frightful conditions, but of a hidden form of strike aimed at the bureaucracy. The bureaucracy finds itself in the sharpest antagonism to the masses of workers and collectivized peasants. It is fearful above everything else that centers may develop around which the masses will rally for political action. Hence Stalin, in the name of the bureaucracy, must act to keep the workers disunited, must establish a completely totalitarian regime.
To create a psychological terror which will prevent one worker from talking frankly to his neighbor, and which will frighten the worker away from any “group”, Stalin starts a spy scare campaign. “Russians Are Told Informing Is a Duty”. The police regime must establish itself right among the masses! Every worker must learn to distrust his neighbor. Make it difficult for people to visit each other. The janitors are ordered to remove all names of their tenants so that any visitor must inquire from the janitor where so-and-so lives. And janitors the world over are used by the police. If anybody has too many visitor, he must be a central figure in a spy plot. Report him!
 
Youth Endangers Stalin
But it is the youth especially that must be watched. The youth that grew up under the Soviet regime and knows no other. Even the Stalinized YCL is a constant source of danger, if only because it permits the youth to come together – and youth can be so engagingly frank! Since the youth cannot be kept entirely apart, the next best thing is to establish the closest surveillance over them. The YCL becomes a tool of the police. Kosarieff performed this function of police agent not so well, hence he is reprimanded and given a warning for next time. Evidently he allowed too much freedom among the youth to suit the apparatus. But freedom and initiative are precisely what the youth demand. Hence the bureaucracy find itself at every turn in the sharpest antagonism to the younger generation.
The wave of trials in the USSR are clear indications, therefore, of the deep-going crisis through which the Soviet Union is passing. The crisis is one which shows the growing antagonism between the bureaucracy and the masses.
It reveals that the bureaucracy can play no progressive role in Soviet economy, but can only serve as a brake on the productive forces. The bureaucracy stands in the way of the initiative of the working masses, it stands in the way of planned economy, it stands in the way of the youth. In order to maintain its power the bureaucracy resorts to an oppressive and bloody police regime worse even than that of Hitler.
 
Stalin Teaches Hitler
For it teaches Hitler the art of extorting confessions by torture for the purpose of bolstering up a regime. How such confessions are wrung from the victims is heart-rendingly told in the book I Confess containing the account of the experiences of the German communist Weiss in the Soviet Union. The entire apparatus of the Stalinist regime, above all the GPU, is devoted to the task of keeping the workers disunited. To terrorize the masses into complete silence Stalin resorts to systematic frame-ups on a scale never before seen in history. These frame-ups, the stock-in-trade of Thermidorean reaction, are used against real and fancied opposition, and also against perfectly innocent victims who are dragged in haphazardly to suit the schemes of the GPU. The earlier frame-ups of the engineers, the Mensheviks, Zinoviev, Kamenev, Trotsky and all the Old Bolsheviks, engender the need for more and more. The present wave of trials thus gathers momentum, but at the same time represents the death agony of the Stalinist regime. For it indicates that the bloody and oppressive regime comes into more and more violent conflict with the masses and their needs. It is this sharpening conflict that will inevitably bring about the sweeping aside of the Stalinist bureaucracy as outworn, corrupt reactionary to the core.
 



History records no greater crime than that of the Stalinist regime
in its treatment of the victims in the concentration camps. Hitler’s
methods were not original. They ran parallel with, if they were not
mere copies of those utilized by Stalin. If Hitler sent millions of
people, primarily the Jews, into the gas chambers, the Russian camps
have crushed, dehumanized and done to death more victims than all
other concentration camps combined. For a time the war brought a
decrease in the slave labor population of the lagiers, as
Stalin’s hell-holes are called. But this was only because the
Kremlin found it necessary to use many of the male prisoners as a
stopgap in the front lines, where they were quickly mowed down. This
was part of the price paid by Russia for Stalin’s being taken by
surprise despite all the warnings that the Nazis would invade Russia.
The end of the war once again reversed the trend. The far-away
Siberian wastes are filling up anew. The slave labor enterprises of
the MVD (the GPU) are operating full blast. There is, nevertheless, a
distinct difference so far as the outside world is concerned.
The Iron Curtain has been definitively pierced. The war broke down
the frontiers so zealously watched by the Stalinist border guards.
Masses of people were hurled across the boundaries, first one way,
then the other. Hundreds of thousands of Poles, among others, more
than half of whom were Jews, fled before Hitler’s armies in 1939
into Stalin’s share of Poland. The Russian criminal code forbade
entry into Soviet territory without proper credentials. What did it
matter that the boundaries had been shifted arbitrarily overnight!
That irony was only deepened by the clause in the “most democratic
of all Constitutions,” Stalin’s own, which specifically set aside
any punishment in case anyone was forced to flee across the borders
as the result of political or religious persecution. The Polish
refugees were arrested, imprisoned for months, then sent to hard
labor in Siberia for three to eight years. This applied to old and
young, the feeble and the strong, worker and bourgeois. The invasion
of Russia in 1941 paved the way for the agreement with the Polish
government in exile headed by Sikorski to build a Polish army on
Russian soil. This made it possible for those who had survived –
and they were a minority – to return ultimately to Western Europe.
The testimony of these people concerning the lagiers and slave
labor in Russia has only begun to be poured out to the world. There
are in addition many Russians, some who had been prisoners of war,
some slave laborers for the Germans, others Red Army deserters, who
resist all attempts to force their return to the “Fatherland.”
The experiences of these Russians under Stalinism are destined to
make a deep imprint on world opinion in the coming period. Humanity
has, to all appearances, remained quite indifferent over a period of
years to the stifled cry of slave laborers of the GPU. The evidence
of the frightful conditions maintained in the lagiers came out
before the outbreak of the war in a thin trickle only. But the fog
created by Stalinist propaganda is being dissipated by the
quantitative weight of unimpeachable testimony. Hitler and Mussolini
have disappeared from the scene, leaving behind only the despicable
Franco. Now the workers of the world will be brought face to face
with the Soviet dictator Stalin and his methods.
The change in attitude bound to come in world opinion will be due
only in part to the wider evidence of the truth concerning Russian
concentration camps. It will also be due to the chilling of the
political atmosphere which has already begun. There is a certain
similarity in this sense with the attitude shown toward Hitler. The
brutalities practiced by the Nazis first of all on the German
workers, later more horribly on the Jews, were known to the diplomats
and to the molders of opinion in the capitalist world. That world
accepted the sacrifice of the Jewish masses in its stride so long as
Hitler was carrying through the counter-revolution in Germany. It was
only when Hitler turned his attention outward against the rival
imperialists that the latter developed humanitarian feeling about
Nazi atrocities. These “feelings,” having served their temporary
political purpose, have long since been discarded. There is somewhat
of an analogy, within limits, in the attitude toward Stalin. The
ruling strata of the rest of the world viewed with undisguised
satisfaction the bloody annihilation of the older Russian
revolutionary generation by the Kremlin bureaucracy. Stalin was
laying the ghost of the revolution; the sympathies of the capitalist
world were with him, not with his victims. But Stalin is now pressing
outward and the feelings of the great power politicians are being
ruffled. Soon these imperialist spokesmen will begin to discover the
awful plight of the starved and beaten victims in the Russian
lagiers. The tone of disinterestedness, even of equanimity,
with which the previous revelations were received, will give way to
another wave of humanitarianism.
How is it that the working class has not lifted its voice against
the inhuman cruelties of the terror regime in the Russian slave
camps? The answer would have to include a full history of the
confusion introduced into the ranks of the workers everywhere by
Stalinism. Those who come out of Russia to live abroad after
suffering the tortures of the damned in the lagiers express
utter astonishment at the inability of people to comprehend what is
taking place under Stalin’s rule. T.S. Eliot speaks in his
introduction to the powerful book, The Dark Side of the Moon,
of the power of planned ignorance. This is indeed the role of
Stalinism. But Eliot fails to mention that, with all the cunning
disinformation created by the Kremlin, with all the aid from the
Communist Parties and their fellow travelers abroad, there had to be
also a certain amount of connivance on the part of the capitalist
world across the frontiers to maintain the Iron Curtain.
The title of the book itself gives part of the explanation of the
difficulty for the truth to find its way to the masses. It was Arthur
Koestler who referred to the vastness of Siberia with its exiled
millions as being as “remote from the Western observer as the dark
side of the moon from the star-gazer’s telescope.” The anonymous
Polish woman who has condensed thousands of documents written by the
Poles released from the Russian concentration camps, adopted her
title from this expression. The sympathies of the writer, an adherent
of the former London exiled Polish government, point in a direction
not palatable to the radical of whatever shade. But the facts she
presents are absolutely incontrovertible. She writes with utmost
objectivity and with surprising restraint. This book must be read by
every person who wishes to know about Russia. Every single document
of the unfortunate Poles, and they come from all walks of life, makes
clear that what they endured was not something unique or special.
They participated in the common experience of the millions upon
millions of Russians in the same camps. The Poles could at least
sustain themselves on the faintest of hopes that some day they would
again return to civilization. But the Russians were sunk in complete,
unrelieved despair, for so long as the Stalin regime endured there
was not the slightest hope that any of them would ever again return
from exile. The stark fate of these lost souls beggars all the
horrors that one can imagine, all that have ever been imagined in
literature. Stalin practices cannibalism not in its literal sense,
but just as surely in the sense of devouring the flesh and bones of
living humanity in the form of slave labor.
There was one practice among others that Stalin and Hitler had in
common. Their armies carried with them in their conquests lists of
“undesirables” who were to be arrested immediately. It is hardly
surprising that both lists were headed by revolutionists. First on
Stalin’s lists were Trotskyists, members of pre-revolutionary
parties such as the Mensheviks, the Social Revolutionaries and
anarchists. One such list that fell into foreign hands had fourteen
categories. The eighth included refugees and political emigres from
other countries; the tenth any persons who had traveled abroad. Last
of all came aristocrats, landowners, wealthy merchants, bankers and
industrialists. Stalinism reintroduced Asiatic justice into Russia,
for it takes not individuals who are wanted but their entire
families. It goes even further. In the course of raids on some house
or other in search of an individual, frequently enough the GPU
arrested everybody in the house for whatever reason. The mass
deportations from Poland were planned by the CPU in four great waves:
in February, April and June of 1940, and again in June, 1941. The
first waves caught in the net representatives of all political
parties of whatever shade of opinion, including the leaders of all
Polish, White Russian, Ukrainian and Jewish socialist organizations
and of socialist trade unions, members of working-class committees,
organizers of working class, peasant and other youth institutions.
The utter cynicism of these “purges” is summed up in that which
took place in June 1941. Up to that time the GPU had utilized local
committees of Communists and sympathizers, and even workers’
militias. These local Communists had often enough helped choose those
to be deported to Siberia. Their own turn came last! All those who
had had any kind of dealings whatsoever directly with the Red Army,
all known Communists, were shipped off in the fourth series of raids.
What a curious light (let us say it mildly) this throws on the policy
advocated by some Trotskyists to have Polish workers in partisan
militias place themselves under the direct command of the Red Army
generals! That policy certainly facilitated the task of the GPU of
uprooting every vestige of working-class independence.
The description of the deportation trains is poignant and tragic
beyond words. The utter indifference to considerations of common
humanity evinced by the Red Army guards is a measure of the
dehumanizing effects of life under Stalinism. The Poles thought first
that this was due to the Russian hatred of Poland. Not at all!
“It was still very difficult for people coming from
outside the Union to understand that such things could be everyday
sights; that members of these people’s own families, their fellow
workers or neighbors, might as easily have been transported in
similar trains to similar destinations ... It was still some time
before they understood that all this was not some otherwise
unheard-of proceeding against themselves as foreigners, but that the
whole system and the institutions to which they were being taken had,
in fact, come into existence and continued to exist as a normal part
of life for Soviet citizens.”
All Russian literature of Czarist times – it is the profound
contribution of that literature to the world – is permeated with
the deepest feelings of humanity, to the very point of inward
torture. Stalinism has, at least outwardly, registered its greatest
success in creating the complete atomizing of society in place of
solidarity. Each is intent on his own salvation and is trained by
terror to show utter lack of any concern for the suffering of his
neighbor. This is true of ordinary life. It is trebly so in the
lagiers where the sheer problem of survival brutalizes every
living soul. A survivor gives this description of the long march from
the detraining center to the camp:
“A nineteen-year-old boy with blood pouring from his
lungs, fell for the last time and was so savagely beaten with rifles
that, in the words of the witness reporting it, ‘he was beaten into
the ground.’”
Since law meant nothing at all, the GPU being a law unto itself,
everything was arbitrary. The crowding of prisoners in trains, then
in prison cells, was something incredible, a country-wide practice of
the black hole of Calcutta. Is it surprising that in prisons also the
terms used by the wardens have become once again identical with those
used in Czarist times? A well-known Socialist sums up the treatment
of prisoners as follows: “The prisoner is to get it into his head
as soon as possible that he is nothing but a thing and that nobody
has any reason to be particular about the way he treats him.”
Stalinism is shown at its “purest” in the slave labor camps.
Here is the final outcome of the GPU system. The Russian prisoners
have a saying: “Nobody leaves lagier behind. Lagier
is forever!” Yet occasionally a medical commission makes the rounds
and releases from labor the total wrecks who have not yet died.
“In September and October 1941, a medical commission
from Magadan visited some of the Kolyma mining and lumber camps. A
long procession of human phantoms appeared in the town and were put
into ships. Those who saw them go aboard could hardly believe they
were human. It was a procession not of human beings, but of corpses
and trunks. The majority had neither noses, lips nor ears; very many
were armless and legless. Among these was a handful only of Poles.
The rest were all Soviet citizens. The Magadan commission had
recognized them as being unfit for work! In Magadan it was said that,
once aboard ship, they were taken out to sea and drowned, but there
is not any proof of this.”
There is a Soviet “opera” unknown to the rest of the world. It
is just the kind of grotesque and gruesome occurrence that one would
expect under the rule of Stalin. In many of the camps the slave
laborers are accompanied to work each morning by a Russian orchestra!
The prisoners sing to its accompaniment a mournful dirge:



”And if you don’t accomplish the norm
They give you only three hundred grams of bread.”



Food is distributed by “Kettle,” of which four or more
categories are prescribed, from the punishment kettle up to the
special kettle of the trustee. The kettle depends upon the amount of
work accomplished, the unit being an impossible norm rarely if ever
achieved. The slaves must put in twelve hours of hard labor besides
the hours of exhausting marching to and from the places of work.
After the invasion of Russia by the Nazis, there were never any free
days. No political prisoners were allowed to hold any sort of
administrative posts, even the most minor. Such posts when held by
prisoners were given to the common criminals of the underworld. These
brigade leaders became bestial slave drivers in order to protect
their own few privileges, above all those connected with food. One
survived, under a system bound to be corrupt from top to bottom, only
through “blat,” inadequately translated as graft.
It is the extent of the slave labor camps that freezes one’s
blood as much as the unmitigated blackness of their administration.
“From this first-hand evidence it is known that vast
regions about Kuibyshev, in northern Siberia and in Kazakstan, with,
to the north, the whole of the Komi Republic up to Archangel, with
Novaya Zemlya, have camps of this kind along almost every kilometer.”
In all this territory the MVD holds complete sway. There exist
only guards and guarded! This tremendous GPU state is divided into
zones, each territory enclosed within barbed wire, patrolled by armed
guards and their dogs, and made doubly secure by lookout towers and
storks’ nests containing sentries. The population of these camps
has never been divulged but is estimated anywhere from ten to twenty
millions of souls. All these slaves are engaged in the building of
canals, railroads, roads and bridges, factories, towns, ports,
mining, forest clearing, or in cultivating gigantic state farms of
ten to twenty thousand hectares.
The concentration camps of Stalin, euphemistically called
“corrective labor camps,” are the index of the fear in the hearts
of the Russian rulers, and of the terror required to hold down the
Russian population. A regime built on measures of this kind and on so
vast a scale is inevitably one of profound crisis. But like all such
phenomena, it takes on an independent development of its own with its
own “vested interests.” It is a source of vast profit to the
state rulers and to the GPU. The Gulag, the labor camp
administration, tries to fill in the glaring gaps due to failures in
the bureaucratic five-year plans. The interstices of these plans,
based on the most intense exploitation of the Russian proletariat,
are cemented with slave labor outright. The turnover of labor in the
giant clusters of camps is an important factor to be reckoned with in
its effects on Russian life. Twenty to thirty per cent of deaths each
year in the mines of the Far East and the Far North are common. Those
who are released after serving their terms, are required to stay put
in the places of exile, but are still counted as “lost” to the
GPU. Replacements are ordered by the Gulag from the country-wide
collection centers. Kravchenko showed how these demands from above
influence arrests and rearrests on any available pretext or none at
all. In colonial days the English resorted to impressment for their
navy or for colonizing of the New World. But never in all history has
there been outright enslavement in any country on such a scale. Uncle
Tom’s Cabin made a great appeal against the separation of
families under slavery. This is a commonplace of Soviet life. In fact
there is a special camp in the Karaganda cluster in Central Asia
known as the “Wives’ Camp” and used for the wives and widows of
former Soviet leaders.
It is clear why Stalin needs an Iron Curtain. He has much to hide.
Not all that he would like to keep hidden has to do with military
secrets. When the Poles began their trek back after their belated
release – the big majority of them remain buried in Russian earth –
Stalin did his best to force them to become Soviet citizens in order
not to let them out with the information they possessed. Stalin
claimed that the Jews taken from Poland were Soviet citizens (as in
the case of Ehrlich and Alter). He finally permitted the one hundred
and fifty thousand of them, survivors of over half a million, to
emigrate. The loss to the camps in this process was made up with
German, Italian and Japanese prisoners of war. It was also made up
with those Russian prisoners of war who were repatriated from Western
Europe, those of them who were not shot outright for having committed
the crime of seeing too much of the outside world. Stalin is fearful
concerning the Russians who have fled abroad, including a large
number of Red Army deserters. They may become the new centers of
resistance, just as did the exiles under the Czar.
The challenge to humanity that exists in such glaring form in the
Russian slave labor camps cannot be ignored without extreme peril to
the working class of the entire world. If it is the workers
everywhere who must free themselves and all the oppressed, it is
certainly the workers of all other countries who must come to the aid
of the workers ground into the dust in Russia. There are those who
would remain silent on this question because they fear that any
agitation against Russian slave labor will become a weapon in the
hands of the imperialists who seek in time to wage war on Russia.
There is no better weapon with which to arm these imperialists than
working class silence on this life-and-death matter. If the vanguard
of the workers is unable to rally the working class in fierce protest
against such inhumanity, then reaction will seize on the issue for
its own purposes at a suitable time. To fail to raise this issue
without let-up because of a fear that reaction will profit from it
means only that one does not know how to make use of the issue in
Marxist fashion. Silence means to participate in the worst crime in
all history. It is hard to believe that the working class, with the
facts already known, can allow another May Day to pass without the
cry: “Down with Stalin’s slave labor camps!”
We Trotskyists owe a special duty to those comrades who gave so
heroic an example to the world (it is now revealed in the testimony
gathered by S. Mora and P. Zwierniak in La Justice Soviétique,
as quoted by the Menshevik Dallin, whose factual gathering of
material is most praiseworthy, though his motives fall under the
shadow of imperialism) at the camp in Vorkuta. Several dozen of them,
while they were still together, “decided to eternalize the people’s
memory of them by a last manifestation of their inflexible will, and
thus remain victorious even if condemned to hard labor.” They
presented demands claiming the right of political prisoners to be
separated from the criminals, the right to be employed only for work
corresponding to their professions, and the right not to be
separated. They then started a hunger strike until success or death,
a hunger strike lasting for 120 days without interruption! Many died
despite forced feeding.
“When all the efforts to break their spirit proved
ineffective, the Trotskyites were separated with the help of a pack
of fierce dogs unleashed in their barracks.”
All were certainly shot later. The memory of these brave ones is
surely eternal! Their challenge to us must be met.
The Russian phenomenon of slave labor is a challenge also to our
theories. Never forget that the camps control vast sections (states
within a state) of “nationalized property.” This nationalized
property – mines, factories, forests, railroads – is completely
in the hands of the GPU. Such nationalized property has become
completely identified with direct state slave labor. It is a kind of
“pure form” of the tendency that exists under completely
reactionary Stalinism. It is the most urgent warning that the mere
words “nationalized property” or any formula using these mere
words without complete and concrete analysis is dangerous and
misleading. Nationalized property under Stalinism, in or out of the
concentration camps, is permitted to serve the masses not in the
slightest degree. Our deepest sympathies go everywhere to the
exploited and oppressed masses. We defend them, their welfare, their
conquests, not those of the privileged and exploiting minority. The
concentration camps in Russia with their millions of forced laborers,
are an important part of the evidence that the nationalized property
taken by the masses in the October Revolution, has been wrested
completely from the hands of the working class. That property today
serves the interests of the rulers completely. The Wall aces, fearful
of any new revolution inside Russia because such a revolution will
endanger the entire capitalist system which they defend, shut their
eyes to the existence of bestial slave labor in Russia. But only such
a revolution can free the millions of political prisoners from the
lagiers and prisons. Only such a revolution can restore the
nationalized property to the masses from whom it was usurped. The
American working class can help their suffering Russian brothers and
sisters along the path to the renewal of the socialist revolution by
protesting in one mighty voice against the retention of the
concentration camps for slave labor in Russia.
April 27, 1947
 



Stalin has made gross blunders more than once. But there is one thing he has always banked on, and quite properly. No bourgeois government, of whatever shade, be it extreme right, center or left, would ever aid revolutionists against him. Quite the contrary, they have gone out of their way to give aid and comfort to Stalin against his revolutionary opponents. We are reminded of this, historic fact by the “revelation” in the Memoirs of Churchill that Benes, then premier of Czechoslovakia, played a modest role in the frame-ups that sent to their deaths the Red Army generals, Tukhachevsky, Gamarnik, et al.
Benes revealed in conversation with Churchill that the Czech police had “uncovered” plotting between the Nazis and the Red Army generals against Stalin’s regime. The “center” for this plotting was the Russian embassy in Prague. The New York Times has a footnote appended to this information to the effect that there is “some evidence” that the Czech police were primed with their information by the GPU, so that the accusations against the army generals could appear to have support through a friendly foreign government. The Memoirs have appeared elsewhere without this footnote, which in any case adds quite ambiguously that whether the GPU supplied the information or not is of no particular consequence. Benes performed a service for Stalin. Churchill might have added that no doubt in his role as “humanitarian democrat,” the creed he professed in his American lectures, Benes was ready and willing to perform an even greater service for the Kremlin. The stupidity of the GPU was all that prevented this service from being consummated.
 
How They Tried to Frame Grylewicz
The Moscow trials up to that of Piatakov in early 1937, it will be recalled, had failed to carry conviction in world opinion. The Kremlin dictator planned to set the stage better for the next big trial, that of Bukharin, Rakovsky and numerous Russian diplomats (the Trial of the Twenty-one), so that the infamous charge of spying for foreign powers, this time Germany and Japan,would make some impression abroad. (It was unnecessary to convince the Russians who, in any case, never believed the trials.) The GPU was therefore given orders to spare no expense to bring off trials of Trotskyites as spies and foreign agents in other countries.
The Franco-Soviet “alliance” had naturally resulted in a similar pact with the French satellite Czechoslovakia. These pacts brought about a spirit of real accommodation to Stalin on the part of the “partners.” The French police had, during the course of the negotiations for a military pact, hounded Trotsky out of France. They went further when the former GPU official Ignace Reiss broke with the Stalinists and was assassinated in September 1937. The ring of murderers, beginning with Spiegelglass, was completely known. The actual killer, Gertrude Shildbach, was in the hands of the French police. Their connivance permitted her to escape across the frontier in a Russian embassy car. The murders of the secretary of the Fourth International, Rudolf Klement, and of Leon Sedov in Paris went completely unsolved due to the calculated inaction of the French authorities. Who was Benes not to prove as compliant as his French superiors?
Reiss had been slain. But his diary remained and was published. It revealed how the infamous Yezhov, fit successor to Yagoda as head of the GPU, had directed that the German revolutionist Grylewicz be denounced to the Czech police as an agent of the Gestapo. Grylewicz, instrumental in getting out the Russian Opposition Bulletin in Berlin before Hitler came to power, had managed to flee to Czechoslovakia just one step ahead of the Gestapo. The GPU now put pressure on the Czechs to bring him to trial as an agent of this same Gestapo that sought to take his life. He was arrested in Prague in July 1937. A suitcase containing letters and documents was confiscated by the police. Reiss reveals how Slutzky, head of the GPU in France, positively fumed with indignation at the slowness of the Czech administration in bringing Grylewicz to trial. The diary also reveals the chief conspirator, Stalin, phoning to Yezhov constantly and impatiently to learn the status of the Grylewicz affair. But alas! The GPU added one more to its careless mistakes in its frame-ups. The suitcase, having left the hands of Grylewicz, was planted with “incriminating” documents appended to his letters. Unfortunately some of these documents bore dates long after Grylewicz had access to his material. How then had he received them? Benes and his police were stumped. Grylewicz was questioned about the Moscow trials, but that hardly helped matters. He was finally expelled from the country in December 1937, after having been held in jail for months without charges and without trial.
This was not the only attempt to condition public opinion to make it receptive for the coming show trial. Preparations were on a worldwide scale, naturally including the United States. Trotsky having found a haven in Mexico, the GPU was ordered to set the stage for a spy scare among the Japanese in California. The Russian press contained hints on this score as early as July 1937. The Rubens-Robinson pair were to be the showpieces in this sector of the frame-up. Here again Stalin failed miserably to achieve his purpose. All that the Rubens case brought about was to uncover the Stalinist passport racket in New York City. The Rubenses were traced beyond any shadow of doubt to the GPU. The attempt to link them up as “Trotskyite spies” sent to Moscow by Trotsky was too transparent. But here again the one government that might have been interested enough to press the case to a conclusion and make public its findings, the United States government, remained absolutely silent. If it did not lend itself to a shoddy frame-up, it also did nothing to expose Stalin. Closely connected with the Rubens case was the disappearance of Juliet Stuart Poyntz who had broken with Stalinism and who knew too much about the Rubenses. This case was never pressed despite the revelations made by Carlo Tresca concerning her abductors. Similarly the murder of Carlo Tresca remains “unsolved” to this day.
The remarkable spirit of accommodation of the bourgeois governments when Stalin’s hounding and framing of revolutionists is concerned, is not lacking even in Churchill’s memoirs. It is not only that he leaves ambiguous the “service” rendered by Benes. Churchill knows the great service that Stalin has performed for the bourgeoisie in wiping out the greatest Marxist leaders. He would undoubtedly agree with the spirit if not with the exact phrasing of the words of one whom he called “that great man,” Mussolini.
Mussolini wrote ironically, but truthfully, in his paper Popolo d’ltalia, after the murder of Bukharin and the others in the Trial of the Twenty-one in March 1938:
“Stalin does not resort to castor oil to punish Communist leaders who are so stupid as still to believe in Communism ... He makes a clean sweep by means of systems which were born in the steppes of Genghis Khan ... Stalin renders a service to Fascism.”
Mussolini was merely more outspoken than the rest of the bourgeois world in thus expressing his thanks to the Kremlin. The rulers on both sides of the Iron Curtain are one in their hatred for proletarian revolutionists.
 


     EDITOR’S NOTE: In our February 1943 Issue we published an article by Olga Petrova, describing in detail the play, The Front, which appeared last fall throughout the Soviet Union. The play was also—an unprecedented occurrence—published in full in Pravda. Its author, Andre Korneichuk, has now been appointed Vice-Commissar of Foreign Affairs. The play depicted the dismissal of “old” Red Army leaders and their displacement by new and young cadres, and sought to show that Stalin, had been right both in having the “old” leaders at the beginning of the war and in now replacing them. Olga Petrova’s article after describing the play, concluded that the displacements in the Red Army were Stalin’s method of unloading the responsibility for his own mistakes and that those dismissed included those heroes of the civil war who had survived the 1936-38 purges of the Red Army. The following article offers a different interpretation of the reorganization of the Red Army.
    The power of the Stalinist bureaucracy was unchallenged and unlimited at the start of the present war. Stalin had dealt ruthlessly with all his real or potential foes. The Old Bolsheviks, those who had played the foremost role during the Civil War and were thus its heroes, had been cold-bloodedly murdered with the judicial aid of the mock trials. Nobody remained of the original Leninist Political Committee that had guided the October Revolution except Cain-Stalin himself. He had gathered around him those elements who were completely at his beck and call, completely “loyal” to himself personally. This dictatorial bureaucracy, interested first of all in its own swollen powers and privileges, faced its major test in the war.
All the facts are not known as to what occurred inside the USSR as a result of the impact of the war on the rule of the bureaucratic clique. But enough is known to indicate that the frauds perpetrated by the Thermidoreans in their crude attempts to falsify history became increasingly evident. War is too much a matter of life and death to permit bluff and bluster and fake records to cover up ineptitude and ignorance in the leadership at the front or in the factories. The early defeats suffered by the Red Army are clearly attributable to two causes. The first is a political cause due to Stalin’s complete lack of belief that Hitler would attack the Soviet Union without placing demands before the Kremlin and thus permit Stalin to negotiate. The success of Hitler’s surprise must therefore be laid directly at the door of Stalin himself. But the second cause is the confusion created in the ranks of the inept bureaucracy.
If we had no other evidence of this fact, we have that of Stalin himself. It is given in the play bureaucratically cut to order, The Front. (The author, Korneichuk, has been promoted to political spokesman for the Soviet Union in the controversy over borders with Poland.) But it must be said at once that whoever accepts the Stalinist version of events fall directly into a trap set for the unwary. The play deals with the changes in Red Army leadership made in the course of the present war, particularly those made in the high command. The removal of figures like Voroshilov and Budenny represents but one aspect of the small crack that already appears in what was apparently a solid, unbreakable front. Will that crack widen and bring about a crumbling of the edifice of the bureaucracy—or can it be cemented together again? The play is one of the many efforts to apply a healing cement, to hold off the inevitable effects of the war on the Soviet Union.
It is evident that Stalin feels the need to explain away what has happened already. Only a vague reference is made in the play to the Red Generals (Tukhachevsky, Gamarnik, etc.) whose bloody purge so weakened the Red Army before the war. The early defeats suffered by the Soviet Union cannot help but have reminded the Russian workers and peasants of those leaders. There must have been keen dissatisfaction with the unnecessary losses in men and material suffered solely because of a political leadership that knew nothing of modern strategy and tactics. The proof of this lies in the play, The Front, in which the attempt is made to take over the criticism and make it appear as if this comes directly from Stalin.
The war forced the Stalinists to take measures in the direction of reform of the Red Army leadership. Better to lose a part, even if a section of the ruling clique, than to lose all by defeat. Not one of the top clique that surrounded Stalin has made much of a reputation as a military leader. Those who have forged to the front are comparative unknowns coming from the rear ranks of the Stalinists, or from outside the bureaucracy entirely. This was in laughable contradiction to the utter myth that Stalin had been trying to foist on Russia and the world for a generation. Was it not Voroshilov, that paragon of military men, the close companion of Stalin, who had been the hero (under Stalin’s guidance, of course!) of the defense of Tsaritsin (now Stalingrad) during the Civil War? Doesn’t the motion picture of that event (with its nauseating flattery of the Dictator) prove this beyond any doubt?
The picture that Stalinist propaganda has tried to impose on history, by violence, by fraud, by outright forgeries, is of the great genius Stalin, choosing his worthy followers by recognition of their great merit. The deflation of the puffed-up Voroshilov at the very first touch of harsh reality tends very decidedly to cast reflection on the Dictator in the Kremlin. (And Voroshilov here represents but one figure among many.) It tends to raise questions concerning the wisdom of those purges which replaced men of known worth, like Tukhachevsky, by such nonentities as those now removed from command. Stalin tries to explain all this in the propaganda-play. The play’s the thing!
The outbreak of the war has imprinted a greater force than that of the GPU on the Soviet Union; namely, that of the war itself. The urgencies of war no longer permit the succession of bloody purges based on frame-ups. Such attempts now, particularly on the scale of the past purges, would completely disrupt defense and would lead to the downfall of the Soviet Union, the bureaucracy included. The whole situation calls for something quite different. Stalin accepts the fact of complete unanimity in the struggle against fascist invasion. All are brothers together in this struggle. The trouble was, according to Stalin, that the really “beloved” leaders of the Red Army, those chosen because of their great services and their heroism during the Civil War, have failed to keep up to date. They failed to study intensively and acquaint themselves fully with modern weapons and strategy. Thus they must be replaced by the more advanced elements who can give proper leadership.
Stalin himself, it goes without saying, has “kept up” with everything. The play actually shows him knowing more about a certain sector of the front than the commander immediately in charge. He knows not only what is happening everywhere, but also he can judge from Moscow which plans are best to set in operation. More than that, he knows which commanders are really proving their fitness, and which ones have fallen out of step. It is not the impact of events that forces the hand of Stalin to remove the deadwood of his bureaucracy. It is still that same old genius which recognizes merit impartially and rewards it, and at the same time punishes stupidity.
The Stalinist version has its political purpose. The older elements who must be removed to save the army are still left with their completely false halo supposedly deriving from the Civil War. They are not “purged,” but simply “retired.” The newer elements, with real initiative and leadership, have not been molded to Stalinist stature and are therefore an uncertain and perhaps even a dangerous quantity for the future of the bureaucracy. Stalin wants therefore to try to cement them to himself and to the bureaucracy by attributing their advancement to himself. He wants also to indicate to the masses that Stalinism stands solely for the good of the entire country. It places only the best in the posts of leadership. The new elements are merely the younger brothers of the ones retired. They are inheriting the mantle worn so well—but in times past—by their elders.
The Front represents in reality a belated effort on Stalin’s part to make a compromise with the youth of the Soviet Union. It is an effort obviously forced on him by the desperate situation created by the invasion. The political sycophants surrounding the Great Marshall have had to yield place to those who could really carry on. But Stalin himself? He will yield nothing. He aims to consolidate his power once again at the first opportunity. He cannot act in his erstwhile arbitrary fashion during the war. But he plans to clamp down at the proper moment, with the aid of the new, younger leaders if he can attract them to his side, against them if necessary. The war, just as we expected, has shifted the weight somewhat against Stalin and his henchmen.
The writer does not agree with the analysis made by Olga Petrova in a previous issue. Her analysis accepts completely and precisely the view that the Stalinists wish to give. Actually, the heroes of the Civil War were removed from the scene long ago by the Stalinist reaction. Those who were promoted in the Red Army and out just before the war were Stalin’s pliable henchmen. Far from being the heroes of the Civil War, they were its gravediggers. The removal of such mediocrities and deadwood as Voroshilov and Budenny obviously brought about a change for the better in the defense of the Soviet Union. The likelihood is that Stalin, fearing the influx of new, virile men not completely under his thumb, has not gone half far enough in removing the rotten elements that infest the Red Army. He would undoubtedly want to maintain a completely reliable base for himself.
The Front is Stalinist propaganda in the interests of Marshal Stalin and his bureaucracy. But it contains nonetheless a contradictory admission that the situation is changing under the impact of the war. The Dictator is no longer merely laying down ukases, but is actually making a subtle appeal for understanding of the beneficial role of the old leaders, that is, of the bureaucracy. That means that this role is not appreciated in the manner Stalin would like to see. It means that new elements devoted to the interests of the Soviet Union rather than to those of the Kremlin clique have forced their way to the front. If history means anything, then the rift that has appeared in the bureaucratic front will not be cemented together but will widen still further. The war has released new forces.


 Every regime rests on certain real and ideological foundations. The three great pillars of Czarist Russia were orthodoxy, autocracy and nationalism. Of these Stalin has established a new form of aristocracy—the Kremlin bureaucracy. He has replaced the old state-religion orthodoxy by a peculiar—because unstable and contradictory—state orthodoxy called Stalinism. And the Kremlin is doing its best to reestablish old-style nationalism.
Commenting on Stalin’s July 3, 1941 speech, which appealed to the feudal Russian tradition of the defeat of Napoleon, the October 1941 Fourth International noted that the name of the Soviet historian, Eugene Tarle, missing since the purges of 1936, had reappeared in the Soviet press. “Perhaps,” said Fourth International, “Tarle will now have to rewrite his writings on the Napoleonic epoch!” And so it is indeed.
Tarle was a renowned authority on the Napoleonic epoch. His Bonaparte was published here some years ago and was justly considered a study in the classic Marxist tradition. But that was sufficient to bring it into conflict with the needs of the Kremlin. He has now unpurged himself by meeting the demands of Stalinist autocracy and orthodoxy (as of today) by his new book on the Napoleonic invasion of 1812. [1] Stalin finds it necessary to recast history in order to set up once again the pillar of nationalism. Tarle writes his present book in the cause of this new “tradition.”
This is not the first time that new regimes bent on serving their own ends have rewritten history. The development of capitalism provides innumerable instances. There is, for example, the difference between the defeated agrarian and the victorious bourgeois interpretation of the critical period in American history culminating in the adoption of the much-haloed Constitution. Similarly the French revolution was much revised by capitalist historians after Thermidor and the Napoleonic period. American history books painted in entirely different colors the Civil War and Reconstruction after the reconciliation between the ruling classes of the two sections, as though the struggle had been an unfortunate misunderstanding.
But nowhere in history has there been so stupendous an attempt to pervert and distort the reality of the past as in the Russia of the Stalinist bureaucracy. This reactionary parasite tries to tear out by the roots from the living memories of men their glowing recollections of yesterday. With the aid of hirelings in all lands, they have tried to make black appear white and white black. Stalin did not help his scribblers too well, because in the devious twists and turns of his opportunist politics, he was again and again forced to call white what he had denounced as black but yesterday. These suddenly precipitated reversals merely reflected the instability of a regime which was attempting to retain the stamp of Lenin and the proletarian revolution while undermining and casting overboard the doctrines and policies of the revolution.
The revision of the history of the Russian revolution was necessitated the moment the Stalinist clique usurped power. It was necessitated by the so-called theory of socialism in one country, used by Stalin to strangle everything that might remind one of the international character of the Russian revolution. It became the aim of Stalinism to dam the revolution and to divert it solely into national channels. But the proletarian revolution could not possibly reach its socialist goal within national boundaries. Hence the Stalinist clique brought about the steady degeneration of the revolution of Lenin and Trotsky. The Kremlin dictator tried to substitute new national foundations for the October revolution, but his failure to do so is attested by the fact that he was forced to pass over the entire period of the revolution and to go further back in history for his national traditions. He was forced to go back to the epoch of the founding of the nation, when the proletariat did not even exist.
Such was Stalin’s ideological preparation of the Russian proletariat for the war against fascism. Indeed how could it have been otherwise? Could Stalin have appealed to the traditions of the Civil War and the struggles against world capitalist intervention? But they were led by the men murdered by the bureaucracy! Far better for Stalin to forget “Marshal Forward” (Bluecher) and his fight against the Cossack Hetman Dutov; or Antonov-Ovseyenko in the Don defeating the forces of Kornilov; Yakir leading the Chinese labor corps against the Rumanians in Bessarabia; Putna at Kazan. It would stick in Stalin’s throat to be reminded of the real turning-point of the Civil War when Tukhachevsky so brilliantly retook Simbirsk. Above all let nobody even whisper the name of the creator of the Red Army and its victories, L.D. Trotsky. The tradition of these men is sealed to Stalin by their blood.
Instead the Kremlin reaction attempts an analogy with Czarist Russia: Kutuzov and his master, Czar Alexander, are praised for preserving the Russian nation; and not only the Russian nation, for by their defeat of Napoleon, that arch-fiend, they helped to preserve all the nations of Europe.   
The Marxist Estimate of Napoleon’s Role The attitude of Marxists towards the Napoleonic wars has always been quite clear. Bonaparte usurped the power of the French revolution as the aftermath of the Thermidorian reaction against the revolution. But he was also the son of the revolution in the sense that he was the arch-foe of the previous feudal ruling class headed by the Bourbons. Napoleon had no intention to restore the past, to restore serfdom. On the contrary, his rule rested on the bourgeoisie and he epitomized the fact that society now had a new ruling class, the capitalists. The wars against the rest of Europe (with the exception of England) were wars of conquest to strengthen the French bourgeoisie but, by the same token, they were wars of defense against the coalition of feudal nations attempting to restore the Bourbons and feudalism in France. Through the Napoleonic wars, the French revolution struck a deathblow at feudalism everywhere in Europe. Serfdom remained longest in Russia precisely because Napoleon failed to conquer there. Thus, while Marxists view the role of Napoleon as reactionary inside France, his role outside was progressive. The serfs everywhere hailed the coming of the French armies because it meant their liberation. This, as much as anything else, aided Napoleon in his victories. The armies of his enemies were already undermined wherever they included serfs.
No Marxist would have dreamed of defending Czarism, that system called by Lenin the “prison of the nations,” against even the degenerated form of the French revolution personified in Bonaparte. That this attitude was correct is clear when one considers the effects of the defeat of Napoleon. Europe was thrown into the blackest reaction, into the dark period of the Holy Alliance founded by the Czar. Italian unity as a nation was postponed until 1870, since Italy was redivided and much of it handed back to Austria. German unity was also forfeited to a much later date. Poland was once again partitioned, the Czar getting the lion’s share. The League of Nations of that period (the Holy Alliance) meant the league of the victorious feudal monarchs against the peoples of Europe. But above all the solution of serfdom in Russia was postponed. The fear of serf uprisings as Napoleon approached the Russian interior had led Alexander to practically promise emancipation—after the war! Instead of emancipation the Czar founded the infamous military colonies.
Tarle understood the Marxist attitude to Napoleon very well, as is proved by his earlier work on Bonaparte. His new book, however, makes a complete about-face, condemns Napoleon and defends Kutuzov and the Czar. The war on the side of Russia is called a war for national liberation, no less! Worse still, Tarle falsely attributes a like view to Lenin. We await at some future time Tarle’s explanation for Lenin’s attitude in the first World War. Just why was Lenin no longer interested in the Russian “nation” and its preservation? Why did he actually raise the slogan of revolutionary defeatism in order to bring about the downfall of Czarism and the opportunity for the proletariat to take power ? Tarle will find it most difficult to answer because he places the nation above the class in his new volume. In this he merely carries out the orders of Stalin.
Let us quote from Tarle’s first book, Bonaparte, to show how clearly he understood the epoch of the Napoleonic wars. He wrote:
“In the realm of foreign policy, Napoleon’s imperialistic tendencies, dictated by the interests of the French bourgeoisie, brought him into conflict with the rotting, actively decomposing semi-feudal world of Europe ...”
The impact of the French revolution is shown again and again, even though refracted through the person of Napoleon.
“He destroyed all traces of feudal laws in conquered Italy, and deprived the churches and monasteries of the right to exact extortions.”
Two quotations will help establish the attitude of the French quite clearly.
“Yes, and how could the French peasant army forget that its Emperor had issued out of revolutionary ranks, when it witnessed with its own eyes that serfs had ceased being serfs and that the nobility no longer dared humiliate them without fear of reprisal, as was the rule in the days of the Bourbons. Instinctively, they knew that outside the borders of France, in the Europe he was conquering, their leader was following the aims of revolution, rather than counter-revolution.”
How did the workers of Paris feel?
“Immediately before the arrival of the news of Marengo, the workers of Paris, of all France, indeed of all Europe, were asking themselves the one question uppermost in their minds: would the benefits of the revolution be maintained, or would they perish? If Bonaparte were killed or taken prisoner, or if his army were crushed by the enemy, one might expect the prompt landing of the emigres and the English in the Vendée, a campaign against Paris, an upheaval in the capital, the invasion of France from the east by the Austrians and other interventionists, the restoration of the Bourbon monarchy, and the resurrection of the old feudal order.”
But this is before the period of Napoleon’s Russian invasion, one might say. Very well. Let us quote Tarle’s earlier book on this invasion. Here is an incidental remark characterizing Czar Alexander:
“Alexander had far more reason to fear Napoleon as the destroyer of the feudal order, but he knew that the transformation of France into an autocratic empire was a circumstance that undermined Napoleon’s moral prestige both in France, and in the rest of Europe, among certain sections of middle-class society—among those human beings for whom the Revolution still preserved a certain fascination. This liberal censure of Napoleonic autocracy by the despotic master of an empire in which feudal serfdom still obtained, is one of the ironies of history.”
Best of all we have Tarle’s earlier remarks on “national” war:
“It would not be amiss here to say something on the so-called Russian ‘national’ war of 1812. Never did Napoleon, or his marshals, speak of the war of 1812 as a ‘national’ war, in the same sense as they spoke of the Spanish guerrilla war as a ‘national’ war. Nor could they compare the two phenomena ... There was not a single national mass revolt against the French, neither then nor after Napoleon’s entry into Moscow. Indeed there were occurrences of quite a contrary nature, as when the peasants of Smolensk complained to the French authorities that their master, the landowner Engelhardt, had been guilty of betraying the French.”
Of the so-called guerrilla warfare:
“The heads of the militia—Figner, Davidov, Seslavin, Kudashev, Vodbolsky—were officers of the regular Russian army who had been authorized to organize detachments of volunteers (from among the soldiers of the regular army and willing newcomers) ... The peasants as a group took no part in these activities ... It is clear that if the Spanish guerrilla warfare might justifiably be called a national war, it would be impossible to apply this term to any Russian movement in the year 1812.”   
Tarle’s New Version of 1812 How differently the same matter is presented in the new book! We are told now:
“Only by resisting this aggression could Russia preserve her economic and political independence. Only by fighting could she save herself from future dismemberment and the ruin incurred through the Continental Blockade ... In the circumstances, the War of 1812 was a struggle for survival in the full sense of the word—a defensive struggle against the onslaughts of the imperialist vulture. This is what gave the war its peculiarly national character and impelled the Russian people to wage it with such heroic fortitude.”
The attempt to distort Lenin’s words—which are not quoted—to give the new coloration appears in this fashion:
“What then was the historical significance of the War of 1812? Lenin gives a clear answer to this question. In his view, the wars of the French Revolution, waged against interventionists in defense of revolutionary achievements, were, under the Directory and Napoleon, transformed into definitely aggressive wars of conquest; these aggressive, plundering, imperialist wars of Napoleon begot in their turn the movement of national liberation in the Europe he had subjugated; henceforth the wars of the European peoples against Napoleon became wars of national liberation. The War of 1812 was the most typical of these imperialist wars; Lenin’s term can be applied to it aptly and convincingly.”
The whole catch in this phraseology lies in the “application” to Russia. Napoleon helped to liberate the serfs and smash feudalism in Europe. The result was to lift up the middle class, the class on which Napoleon relied. But this class in turn acted to free the nation from the foreign yoke. This was true particularly of Germany and Italy. But it was absolutely untrue concerning Russia, which became the dominant force in the European alliance against France.
Tarle again and again refers in his earlier book to the fact that Napoleon could have saved himself in Russia by declaring the freedom of the serfs, as he had in Poland. But he refused to do so. This apparent enigma is due to the simple fact that Napoleon was not interested in the peasants, but in the middle class. In Napoleon’s view the organization of society must depend on the authority of the middle class or, where no such class existed, the feudal nobility. The latter was the case in Russia. No middle class existed powerful enough to take over the reins of government from the Czar. Hence Napoleon felt forced to seek an eventual peace settlement with the Czar, and, holding that perspective, he would not free the serfs and undermine Czarism. Until the end, however, the Russian peasants hoped Napoleon would free them, as he had freed the serfs of Poland. That is why they betrayed the landowner Engelhardt to the French.
But it is necessary now to set up 1812 as an example of national patriotism for the Russian workers and peasants, in the eyes of Stalin. So Tarle tells us something new—and false:
“The morale of the people gained enormously. Not fear but anger was the dominant sentiment. Witnesses testify that in this terrible moment (the march on Moscow) all classes merged in one common emotion. Better death than submission to the invading ravisher! Peasants, lower bourgeoisie, merchants, nobility—all vied with one another in their eagerness to fight Napoleon to the death.”
Kutuzov, the cruel landowner, is now pictured anew:
“He will be remembered as the genuine representative of the Russian people in the most terrible moment of Russia’s existence.”
Tarle must “correct” the impression he gave us in his earlier book. Hence he now says: “the same peasants met Napoleon as a fierce enemy, fighting with all their strength, as no other peasants had fought him except those of Spain.” Then we have this travesty on the feudal peasants and serfs who formed 95 per cent of the Russian population:
“For the Russian peasants, the defense of Russia from the invading enemy was a defense of their lives, their families, their property.”
Tarle had told us in his earlier book of the many peasant revolts during the invasion, even among recruits. He must now explain this away.
“In 1812 now in one place, now in another, the peasants rose against the landowners, as they did before and after. However, the presence of the enemy army did not strengthen but weakened the anti-landowner movement. The ruthless enemy deflected the peasants’ attention from the landowners. The threat that hung over Russia, the enslavement of the entire Russian nation by the alien conqueror, became the first consideration.”
Thus we see the Stalinist idea projected back in history that the nation is above the class, above all classes. Even bourgeois historians give the lie to this falsity. The fact is that the Czarist government in 1812 refused to permit the arming of the peasants, fearing quite correctly that the arms would be turned against the oppressors at home. The government went so far as to order the disarming of the peasant militias that had been in existence for some time. The idea of organizing peasant guerrillas was frowned upon. The Russian army itself experienced mass desertions. Tarle is forced to admit that bad as conditions were in the French army, they were infinitely worse in the Russian army. No wonder the army of Kutuzov dwindled almost as rapidly as that of Napoleon! Yet Tarle says:
“The guerrilla movement which began immediately after Borodino, achieved its tremendous success only through the active, voluntary and zealous assistance of the Russian peasantry ... The national character of the war was at once revealed in organized forms — in the army. In Spain the national war assumed quite other forms because in that country much time passed before military units could be organized.”
The importance of Tarle’s book lies not in Tarle himself, or in his descent into falsification of history. It lies in the light it throws on Stalinism. The present war is being fought under the leadership that has betrayed the Russian revolution. This leadership cannot possibly advance the revolutionary ideas that might lift not only the Russians but the Germans to heights of revolutionary fervor that would undermine Hitler’s armies. Stalin speaks of the socialist fatherland, but his emphasis is on the idea of a national fatherland. Lenin and Trotsky also defended the socialist fatherland, but their entire emphasis was on the revolutionary internationalist methods by which and by which alone the Russian revolution could be saved. Since Stalin cannot and dares not appeal to the German soldiers in terms of socialist revolution, he must substitute nationalism instead. The German soldiers have committed the heinous crime of obeying their masters and invading Russia. Stalin denounces them as lower than human, as completely bestial beings that must be completely destroyed. But the Russian workers and peasants are fighting so enthusiastically not for the national fatherland in the abstract but for the fatherland that embodies the conquests of the October revolution, despite its Stalinist degeneration. What if there does come a time of fraternization between the Germans and the Russians? Then woe betide both Hitler and Stalin. The October revolution will once more come into its own.
 
Footnote
1. Napoleon’s Invasion of Russia – 1812, by Eugene Tarle. Oxford University Press, 1942. $3.50.

 Roland: Twilight in the British Empire (February 1942)




Weber (Jacobs) Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index  |   ETOL Main Page

A. Roland
Twilight in the British Empire
(February 1942)
 Roosevelt and Churchill wish to have their alliance known as the United Nations. No doubt there are a number of reasons for avoiding the term “Allies” which was used in the first World-War. One good reason is that two of the Allies, Italy and Japan, this time are on the opposite side. Another reason may well be the desire to have forgotten the post-war history in which the Allies fell quickly apart in the scramble of self-interest. It must be a naive person indeed who thinks that in this war the most perfect harmony exists among the new United Nations. Conflicts of interest must be temporarily subordinated, naturally enough. But they do not disappear.
The relations between the United States and the British Empire is the main case in point. The Ottawa agreement was an attempt by Great Britain to protect its trade within the Empire against the encroachments of its powerful American rival. One of the aims of the international restrictive schemes initiated by England, with respect to such commodities as rubber and tin, was to keep control of these materials out of American hands and to have a lever that could be used against this country.
The Lease-Lend Act marked a real turning point in the history of the British Empire. It constituted clear recognition not only that the British have been bankrupted by the new imperialist war, but that it would be unable to pay back any monetary loans after the war. Indeed, how could it be expected to pay back billions of dollars after this war, when it had already shown its inability to pay back the money loaned to it in the last war.
The acceptance of this fact gives the United States a tremendous lever over the British Empire. The British capitalists have no choice but to accept the bitter pill of charitable help extended by a “generous” America. The American capitalists will not fail to use this power of life and death over the British Empire for carrying out some of their own cherished aims.   
America Vetoes British Exports The fact of the matter is that they have already used the lever to extract certain advantages. No sooner had lease-lend become effective, than there was a sudden outcry in the American press against British export trade. Here was the United States big-heartedly sending steel and all kinds of metals and other war materials to England for use in the war—and there was the British ingrate, using this very material for export to South America to compete with United States business.
The English waxed most indignant at the charge and swore the exported materials were pure British. They even offered to permit the FBI to send men over to check carefully on the uses of the lease-lend material. But the pressure of United States exporters transmitted through Washington had its way. Churchill was forced to agree to curtail exports for the duration of the war.
This was hardly taken in Christian resignation by the English exporters. The journals arid magazines of Great Britain carried on quite a spirited debate on this subject. They pointed out to Churchill that only a few months before the English government had established an Export Council whose duty it was to drum up as much export business as possible, since England had to find the means in foreign exchange to pay for many necessary imports of the raw materials of war. Now the Board was to become an ornament whose duty would be to keep touch with the old markets by means of a kind of “token” export, a mere trickle of the old volume of exports.
The British capitalists swallowed hard to keep down their resentment. They dared not make a frontal attack on the United States in view of the situation, which included their own helplessness. Nevertheless they came quite close to doing so, if we read between the lines. Articles in their press were headed by such titles as Must Victory Be Bought at Cost of Economic Subservience? English business did not feel like ruining itself just to win a war!
A.M. Taylor, one of the manufacturers who participated in the discussion, wrote in the magazine Great Britain and the East:
“To the oft-repeated statement that we must win the war first, we must say that defeating Germany is not all that is meant by the phrase ‘winning the war.’ We must also defeat Germany’s object, which is to destroy the British Commonwealth of Nations. We have two enemies to fight—Germany and destitution. After beating German arms, must we face defeat by an equally destructive enemy, accompanied by German derision, namely, economic subservience?”   
America’s Influence Within the Gates English imperialism obviously is chafing under the unaccustomed yoke of American imperialism. This is not the only expression of alarm over what is happening. Naturally the English capitalists fear that they will not easily recover, perhaps not at all recover, the foreign markets now being taken away from them. It took years for them to regain a part of their foreign markets after the last war. This time it will take years to reach the point where they can even think of competing with their colossal American competitor. That competitor meantime establishes a dollar block in all South America by means of loans and trade.
English fear is also concerned over the tremendous influence that the United States already exerts within the Empire itself. Take Canada as the nearest example. The United States pledged its military aid to Canada before all else. Not only that, but at Ogdensburg it set up a joint defense board with the Canadians. That defense board, one may be sure, is unlikely to be controlled primarily by the junior partner. Its task is to help coordinate United States defense of the whole hemisphere. Thus it supervises the building of military roads through British Colombia to link the United States with Alaska, that far-flung arm of US military power.
The conservative English magazine, Round Table, discussing the real meaning of Ogdensburg—which England was powerless to prevent even had it dreamed of doing so—says:
“It is a common observation that Canada is steadily becoming more North American ... Canada’s continuance in the British connection may therefore depend on the capacity of British statesmen to build a new Europe with a reasonable chance of peace ahead of it.”
Parenthetically we may say that England’s chance to build such a Europe will be even less after this war than it was after the last one.
But the conservative organ really clinches the argument when it adds:
“A very long war into which the United States entered and which causes it to put forth every ounce of its strength might well burn out American isolationism entirely, but it would almost certainly replace it with imperialism. Any peace that would follow such a war would be an American peace, with Great Britain influential, but far from dominant. The way would then, as has been hinted above, be open for a new English-speaking synthesis about the Republic.”
That is to say, many of the colonies and dominions of the Empire would move out of the orbit of the British and into that of the United States.
Precisely the kind of war visualized here now faces the world. The war will be longer and more exhausting than was at first thought possible. The United States will strain every ounce of its tremendous strength to snatch the victory from Hitler. The English conservatives face the facts cold-bloodedly. They have no illusions about “Union Now” or about a World Federation of the Republic and the Empire. They know that this means not an equal status but the domination of the world by the American colossus.
American forces will fight on all the continents and in all parts of the world. Before Pearl Harbor answered the question as to exactly where American troops would fight first, there was speculation concerning the likelihood that the first place would be the Near East. There can be no question but that the United States will help England maintain the Mediterranean life-line against Hitler’s southern and eastern moves. Churchill and Roosevelt prepare for the eventuality that Hitler may defeat Soviet Russia. Churchill showed this attitude clearly in a message sent in October to the first meeting of the National Defense Council of India. He spoke of Indian troops being engaged in 1942 “on a very long front from the Caspian Sea to the Nile.” If and when this happens, American troops will be there to help.
Churchill knows that such help will come at a price to the British Empire. He sees how the dominions and colonies turn more and more to this country. Australia and New Zealand have for the first time sent their own ministers to Washington. This is a sign of independence from London not lost on the English. Secretary Hull, in reporting to his allies concerning the conversations that he carried on with the Japanese, met not only with Halifax, but with Casey of Australia. Curtin, premier of that country, made the most open threat to turn away from England and towards America if England ignored the demands for aid made frantically by the dominion; his later “explanation” of his words cannot conceal the fact.
After the last war England tried to protect itself against America by creating through the Ottawa agreement an Empire trade block with preferential treatment for England. This agreement was quite irksome to the United States which also was in bad need of expanded markets. Just before the United States formally entered the war, there appeared an article in the New York Times headed US, Britain Form Post-War Policy. The sub-title stated further: Plan Economic Concessions to Secure Peace—Draft Accord on Lease-Lend Payments. Just what is this accord? The Times tells us, in carefully guarded tones:
“In negotiations now going on, mainly in London, to reach a ‘master agreement’ on the settlement of Britain’s lease-lend obligations, as it is understood, the State Department has asked the British Government to cooperate in a post-war plan to remove restrictions on the free flow of international trade and to give all nations fair access to essential raw materials controlled by Britain. This was interpreted in authoritative quarters today as meaning that the US was asking Britain, as part of the lease-lend agreement, to reconsider her Empire preferential tariff program, as defined by the Ottawa agreement of 1932, in an effort to promote international trade and international peace.”
The United States wishes to share the Empire markets with Britain; that is, it wishes to get the foothold necessary to build up its powerful influence in order later to oust England from her own colonies. Nor is it solely a.matter of a trade agreement. For the Times  goes on:
“For example, this country has asked them to accept the principle that the United States may use any British naval base that we consider vital to our security, and have agreed to this suggestion.”
These negotiations involve not only use for the war’s duration, but questions of long-term lease, perhaps even cession of Western Hemisphere bases, as has been suggested, as payment for lease-lend.
The sending of American troops to Dutch Guiana shows that the United States will not hesitate to establish itself wherever it feels the necessity to do so.
The Times finishes its article on the note that the reason for the negotiations was dissatisfaction here over the phrase included in the so-called Atlantic Charter “with due respect for their existing obligations.” This was rightly looked upon as a tricky way for England to squirm out of fulfilling the demands made on her by this country.
The English prolonged the discussions up to the moment of the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor. The actual entry of the United States into the war then gave the British the opportunity to try to shelve further negotiations till after the war was won. Churchill gave the line to his diplomats by brushing aside all queries on post-war settlements and saying that the only important thing now was to win the war. That formula, however, will hardly end the discussion if the United States can help it.   
The Atlantic Charter and India The Atlantic Charter proved embarrassing to England in a different fashion. Its vague reference to the democratic right of self-determination caused representatives of India to inquire politely whether this Charter of Freedom also applied to her. The question was put in parliament by a Labor member to Mr. Amery, Secretary of State for India.
Amery’s evasion did not put matters forthrightly enough for that die-hard Churchill, who thereupon practically repudiated even the perfectly innocuous wording of his own secretary. Amery had said:
“There is a general desire to see India take her place as a free and equal partner in the British Commonwealth. That is a matter of principle in which we have taken the lead (!) before the Atlantic Charter, which introduces no new principle, was ever promulgated ...”
Churchill intervened to say bluntly that the Charter was not intended to apply within the Empire, that India was an affair that concerned solely the British government and India. This statement outraged even the most reactionary elements in India; even those who support England in the present war were forced by the prompt reaction in India to attack Churchill. Thus the Premier of the Punjab, Sikander Hyat Khan, called Churchill’s statement the “biggest rebuff India has ever received.”
How little the Atlantic Charter applies inside the Empire is shown by the figures Amery was forced to cite in answer to other queries. He was asked how many people were in jail for political reasons. Amery said there were 12,129 up to July 1, 1941. Of these 28 were ex-ministers and 290 were former members of provincial legislatures.
What is happening in India’s movement for freedom? At the beginning of the war the native bourgeoisie tried to force concessions from England for the benefit of native manufacturing. England refused all concessions and thereby alienated the Indian bourgeoisie. During the attempt at negotiations, Gandhi was temporarily ousted as leader of the Congress Party. The moment the Party was rebuffed by the viceroy, Gandhi was reinstated to head a new Civil Disobedience movement.
But when England suffered reverses in the war, the government was forced to reverse itself in part. Despite all their desires, the English had to start building up industries for the war in India. This has brought somewhat of a boom for the native capitalists and they have become far more cooperative as a result Gandhi has once more been replaced, this time by Nehru who now gives full support to the British in the war. Gandhi himself now comes out with collaborationist statements:
“We wish no harm to the British, for their defeat would connote the victory of the Nazis, which we do not and must not desire. Whatever others may think, India does not desire her independence out of Britain’s ruin.”
The pro-British position of the leaders of the Congress Party has brought a rift. A differentiation has commenced between these leaders and those who want to continue the fight for India’s freedom.
The cold fact of the matter is that real independence for India, England’s most valuable colony, could not help but mean the ruin of British imperialism. Hence a statement such as Gandhi’s means that he does not really want independence, but only more of a share of the loot of exploitation for the native capitalists. This is also shown by his answer to those asking him whether they should sell their textiles for the use of soldiers. His answer was that in selling goods on the market, one does not inquire the caste of the customer.
British concessions have eased the situation somewhat for the native upper class. But hardly for the masses of India. The British are squeezing India as never before to help pay for the war. Then too, the masses are being recruited for the army, to fight the battles of their masters. In the last war, there were two million from India in the British armies. Now the Indian army already numbers more than a million and far more will be used. The well-known English commentator on Indian affairs, Sir Alfred Watson, laments now that India was not in a better position to contribute her strength to the war effort. He says that India could easily have an army of ten million. He complains too:
“With her vast population accustomed to work and with inherited traditions in the handicrafts, India could easily out-manufacture Japan, but she lags far behind.”
The difference between Japan and India is obvious, of course. The first was never under British domination and was not, therefore, prevented for over a century from employing her resources to industrialize.
The attitude towards labor parties in all the dominions and colonies indicates a significant trend. In Australia a Labor Party government has taken power. This government, under the social-patriot Curtin, is certainly not anti-British. But investigate the real reasons for its coming to power, not the immediate political factors that screen the basic facts. The basic reason was the wave of unrest among the workers, particularly in New South Wales. This unrest showed in the attitude towards increased taxes. The government placed new taxes on the lowest income brackets to cut down buying power of the masses. This was the conservative government’s way of preventing inflation. The government was taking these taxes right out of the pay envelopes. Many workers found that they worked long hours of overtime, only to have the government take away as taxes most of the extra amounts. The result was a movement among the unions to ban all overtime work. This brought the Curtin government. The taxes were lowered.   
Significant Trends in the Dominions The Canadian Commonwealth Federation recently won elections in the Western states. Here, too, a curious contradiction ensued. The workers voted for social patriots who supported the war, but the issue of the campaign was: who was to bear the burden of the war? The CCF demanded that the government place the burden on the rich rather than on the masses. They demanded some sort of planning by the government for carrying on war production at minimum expense.
The significant thing about this, as well as about the position occupied by the Labor Party in the British government, is that the ruling class is forced to recognize that the attitude of the masses in this war is not the same as in the last one. The masses are no longer naive in the old sense. They do not propose to allow the rulers to take away their standards of living without a fight. The patriotic appeal works only after a fashion. It is the same thing as the CIO supporting Roosevelt and at the same time supporting the coal miners’ strike. This attitude was not seen in the last war, and it cannot be ignored.
This is not to be taken as meaning that we see revolution breaking out tomorrow in the British colonies. Churchill is using to full advantage the working-class hatred of fascism. These workers are for the most part of the opinion that the war is being fought to defeat fascism. They do not yet see that their own aim in the defeat of fascism is not at all the same as that of the “democratic” imperialists. Thus they are bound to experience a severe jolt when they discover that Churchill’s aim is merely the defense of the Empire against Germany’s encroachment. That jolt is sure to come as the war unfolds. The war can bring only misery to the masses everywhere. The bankruptcy of the British government has already been announced by lease-lend before the war was well started. All the so-called planning to stave off an economic crisis after the war will not help. That situation contains the seed of deadly conflict between the working class and the “democratic” bourgeoisie.
If the English and the Americans are victorious, as is most likely, they will find it necessary to police not only all of Europe, as they now plan so openly to do, but they will find it necessary to police England and the colonies as well. The British capitalists will not emerge from this struggle the same as they went into it. The position of the British Empire as a first class empire will have degenerated. The British capitalist class will have to accept its subordination to the United States. This will mean the sharing between two masters of the surplus value produced by the workers of all the lands of the Empire. The British capitalists will try to retain their full share by squeezing more out of the masses to pay the piper in Washington. But the masses already show that they will resist any such scheme. The British Empire is threatened with disintegration from within and from without. The United States will inherit not merely fragments of an empire, but also the class struggle that is piling up inside that empire and that will burst forth the moment the post-war crisis makes itself felt, if not sooner.


 THE RISE OF FASCISM to power in one country after the other in Europe, poses acutely again and again, along with the problems faced by the working class, the entire Jewish Question. King Carol’s dictatorial “solution” of the social and political crisis in Rumania, and now the extension of Hitler’s power to Austria, serve to widen the scope of the problem. Already a major social catastrophe in time of “peace”, the plight of Jewry seems destined to be frightful indeed in the coming World War, acknowledgedly close upon us.
Where shall the Jew turn? Where lies his salvation? The question takes on a different aspect indeed from that faced in the period of the rise of capitalism. The Jews played a highly progressive role in helping to bring into being and firmly establish the capitalist system. With the movement toward national capitalist unification, it seemed possible that the Jews might become assimilated in the various lands of their dispersion. Particularly did this seem likely as social and political rights were granted to the Jews and as the ghettos began to disappear. The early Marxists felt that this process of assimilation would solve the Jewish Question. But the epoch of decay of capitalism has brought with it a tremendous resurgence of nationalism which in turn engenders anti-semitism.
Obviously there is nothing new in the methods of persecution adopted by Hitlerism in Germany—neither specifically nor in general. Imperialism maintains its sway by sowing division and hatred everywhere, at home and abroad. In India it pits Hindu against Moslem, in the Balkans one race against another, in Palestine Arab against Jew. In old Russia the Czars thought to divert the Revolution from its channel by instigating pogroms. Hitler borrows this self-same weapon from the arsenal of Czarist reaction. True he does not permit a Kishenev in Germany, but applies the far worse method of slow starvation, the “cold” pogrom. What is new about this decadence is that the rise of Hitler to power has contributed a political technique to the reactionaries of all Europe for their emulation. Thus anti-semitism is part of the cancer of Nazism that spreads poisonously outwards from the center of infection, Germany, the very country in which the Jews had been more nearly assimilated than anywhere else in the world. Hitler has elevated anti-semitism into a part of reaction’s Weltanschauung and into a world problem.
At a time when the right of unrestricted immigration would prove of invaluable aid to the persecuted Jews, all lands are more or less closed to them. The great influx of Jews into the United States was stopped by the Johnson Quota Law of 1924 (a law promulgated not during any period of crisis, but entirely on the basis of reactionary racial politics). At that time Canada and South Africa followed suit and closed their doors. Thus when the terrible Polish crisis developed in that year and the Jews were oppressed unbearably under Grabski’s economic policies, the wave of migration that followed could seek the shores of Palestine alone. The pressure of economic necessity awakened a new interest in the idea of a Jewish homeland. Whether one sympathizes with this idea or not it must be acknowledged that Zionism grew as a force among Jews. Certainly one can have only the profoundest sympathy with the idealism of the Jewish masses who longed for some solution of their desperate plight during and after the World War. But we have had a whole generation of experience with Palestine since the War and surely it is now possible to evaluate that experience.
What a tragic experience it has been! View it from any angle one chooses, the short history of Palestine can only convince those whose minds are at all open to the simple truth, that the establishing of a “free and independent” Jewish homeland there or anywhere else is an impossibility so long as capitalism lasts. How can the Jews, for one thing, entrust their fate to British imperialism? That imperialism seeks only its own interests, the defense of the imperial trade routes through the Mediterranean and the Suez Canal, the establishing of a naval base and a protected air base in the Near East, the protection of its oil fields, the setting up of some force completely dependent on Britain to act as a counterfoil, if and when necessary, to the Arabs seeking their national independence. How can the Jewish masses—we do not speak here of the Jewish big bourgeoisie or their close henchmen—seeking freedom and liberation from oppression ally themselves with the greatest oppressor of all, British imperialism?
But even the most sanguine of the Zionists, the most trusting in the good faith of the “democratic” English bourgeoisie, have received a rude lesson from that source recently. The White Paper calling tentatively for the partition of Palestine into two separate states, the smaller one for the Jews, indicates quite clearly that England is seeking the best way to satisfy its own needs in the situation. The times do change, and English policy changes accordingly. Those Zionists who are willing to foster the complete dependence of their movement on English bounty, have already adapted themselves to a bad bargain and are even willing to accept the much narrowed base for their state existence, as a lesser evil. The trouble is that behind the purposely vague plans for partition all Zionists can see plainly the possible preparation for a complete abandonment of support for a Jewish homeland. In the debate in the House of Commons on the Palestine question between Ormsby-Gore, Secretary of State for the Colonies, and Colonel Wedgwood, that “Laborite champion of the Zionists”, the best solution this good friend could advance was for England to arm the Jews, withdraw all British troops and “let them fight it out with the Arabs”. This can be understood in only one way: Wedgwood, Laborite adherent to the Second International, has no solution to offer and would like to have England wash her hands of the whole matter. Wedgwood demands that the Jews be allowed unrestricted entry—into Palestine. He makes no effort to have England herself, or South Africa, or Australia, open the door to unrestricted immigration. In that respect he agrees with Hitler.
But even if we ignore the ever-present threat of a complete collapse of the homeland idea, we are bound to face another side of the question: in a world dominated by the great powers, with no part of it free from their influence (not even Russia with its one sixth of the globe) what sort of homeland could be set up in Palestine? Only a replica of the capitalist state with all its class oppression. And that is, of course, precisely what has been set up there. The Jewish toilers, pioneering in a country without great natural resources and with no free land available, have suffered as much misery in Palestine as anywhere else. If there was any delusion in the minds of Jews that the artificial and short-lived prosperity of Palestine during the worst years of the world crisis would endure, the present desperate situation there has brought quick disillusion. The boom period of speculation has been followed by the complete prostration of economy so that the trade union movement is faced with a herculean task in coming to the relief of its members.
Palestine is an integral part of the world capitalist system, subject to the same laws of crises and unemployment. Truly when the Jews migrated to Palestine, the dalles (poverty) went with them. It is utterly unthinkable—that goes without saying—that the Jews could set up socialism and a planned economy in Palestine alone. The class struggle in Palestine presents the same features so familiar in other capitalist countries. There is even a movement afoot, that of the Revisionists, to suppress working class organizations, particularly the trade unions. In short, the so-called Jewish fascist movement, with its gangsterism.
Finally, the terror that hangs like a pall over Palestine, due to the conflict with the Arabs, has placed the Jews in a most tragic situation from which there seems little hope for escape so long as the present capitalist system remains dominant. If the Jews must depend on Palestine for a solution to their problems, then it can only be said that they have reached an utter impasse. Palestine offers no way out—unless the rest of the world is changed first, unless capitalism is abolished from the earth. For only with the disappearance of exploitation will the fierce race hatreds and racial oppression die down and finally vanish.
Trotsky has pointed out that to establish real self-determination for the Jew would require that all those desiring to foster a Jewish culture and to participate in a common life, should be free to travel to some assigned spot—whether Palestine or any other—and that this transportation of millions of human beings would require the voluntary agreement of many different countries and the providing of vast facilities. Such voluntary aid on so vast a scale is absolutely unrealizable so long as capitalism lasts. It could become possible only under a cooperative, a socialist system of society. The conclusion is inevitable that even for those Jews who desire a separate homeland, the path to the realization of their goal lies through the class struggle, through allying themselves with the rest of the working class and the masses everywhere to bring about the proletarian world revolution. This involves first of all a struggle in their own ranks against their own bourgeoisie and all the propounders of capitalist ideology. It means the utter repudiation of the upholders of imperialism, of the Revisionists with their vicious pan-Jewish (what an ironic anomaly!) brand of chauvinism. It means the repudiation of the leadership of types like Jabotinsky and Lord Melchett (the same Sir Alfred Mond who sells nickel and other metals to all the world’s armament manufacturers), who speak openly of making Palestine the Singapore of the Near East for England. Their leadership means offering the Jewish masses in bondage to English imperialism.
The Jews the world over must commit themselves to the defeat of fascism. In this struggle they become inevitably the allies of the workers in the anti-fascist movement. At the same time the anti-fascist cause comes naturally to the defense of the Jews. Thus it comes about that the Polish workers, the greatest victims of the anti-Semitic poison spread by the Polish rulers, have begun to come to the defense of their Jewish brothers, a striking instance being the rout of the pogromists a short time ago by an organized detachment of PPS workers at the Iron Gate of Warsaw. In Vienna during the short-lived opposition to Hitler’s conquest of Austria, the workers also fought against the pogromist activities of the Nazis. In Rumania also, although this may prove temporary, the anti-fascist peasant party came to the defense of the Jews, the Peasant Guards fighting the fascist Iron Guards in their behalf.
But the anti-fascist struggle can only mean the fight for socialism. Every new happening on the international arena brings that lesson home—unless the workers seize the power in the cause of socialism, all other expedients to prevent the coming to power of fascism prove to be merely temporary stop-gaps. This in turn means that the Jews must define their attitude clearly to all working class forces and parties. Immediately the question arises as to which International to support. The Second International, with its reliance on the forces of bourgeois democracy alone, forces which are the first to disappear under the heels of the armed bands of fascism, has proved completely bankrupt, utterly impotent to bring about socialism. By all its collaborationist policies and tactics the Second International gave objective support to the victory of fascism and hence betrayed the workers and also the Jews. In the present instance the Second International betrays the Jews anew by assisting actively in linking their fate and the fate of Palestine with that of “democratic” British imperialism. But then how about the Third International?
At once the question of Biro-Bidjan comes to mind. This should serve as a crucial test of the Stalinist Comintern for the Jews, bearing always in mind the clear-cut distinction to be drawn between the Soviet Union set up by the October Revolution and the ruling Stalinist caste. The Jews were to be permitted to build an autonomous national republic as part of the Federated Soviet Union, thus carrying out for the Jews the democratic right of national liberation in accordance with the ideas of Leninism. Certain “friends of the Soviet Union”, notably Lord Marley, once told us that “The number of Jews who could be received in Biro-Bidjan is quite unlimited [his own italics] and there is no problem of an existing local population to be dealt with”. He pointed out that this republic was more than half the size of England. Unlimited space, opportunities, vast natural resources! The American section of the ICOR alone was to be permitted to send over one thousand families (not so many, after all!).
What has become of Biro-Bidjan and why? We demand an explanation! Why has Russia, that country above all others that should be the spokesman for all the oppressed, the logical spokesman therefore to defend the persecuted Jews, not only remained completely silent but actually closed her doors to all “foreign” Jews? Nay, more, why has Stalin refused to accept back those sixty Russian Jewish families, Soviet citizens, that Hitler wanted to deport to Russia? Why did Stalin purge the administration of Biro-Bidjan along with that of every other national republic without exception? These republics were all founded with a view to permitting the unhampered development of national cultures within the framework of the Soviet system. Stalin, that erstwhile People’s Commissar of Nationalities, removes entire national governments, administrations previously hand-picked by himself, without so much as a by-your-leave on the part of the peoples involved—on the pretext that they are “nationalistic”!
The truth is that the Stalinist bureaucracy, among all its other crimes, has completely ignored the “rights” of nationalities; Stalin has restored the old Czarist system of centralized bureaucratic control of the various nations that constitute Russia. The Stalinist clique has reconstituted the Great Russian administrative center with its oppression of other nationalities. It was inevitable that the counter-revolutionary Stalinist caste should come into violent conflict with, among other democratic rights, that of national democracy and national autonomy guaranteed by the obsolete Leninist Soviet Constitution. Far from becoming the spokesman for the Jews, Stalin stated, when he closed the door to foreign Jews, that he wanted to avoid “international complication”. Evidently he did not want to embarrass the fascist dictators! Truth to tell, Stalin also does not want any foreigners at all, Jew or non-Jew, to enter Russia to discover what is actually happening there.
The lot of the Jew in Russia is far from being that free and equal life that the Stalinist apologists, the Jewish hirelings included, would have us believe. Quite the contrary, true reactionary “leader” of a totalitarian state, Stalin has taken a leaf from the notebook of Hitler and attempts to divert the smoldering hatred of the Russian masses away from the reactionary tops of the bureaucracy to the middle and lower layers, frequently Jews. Anti-semitism is again becoming part of the Russian system, though not yet quite as openly as under Czarism. Indeed one must ask, when Jews among others are removed from near the frontiers (as enemies of the people!) in furtherance of the plans for military defense, where are they sent? Is it possible that Biro-Bidjan will be converted into a national ghetto?
By his betrayal of the October Revolution and his active aid against world revolution, Stalin has been, along with the leaders of the Second International, the outright betrayer of the working class and of the Jews. The Third International bears just as much responsibility for the advent of fascism in one country after the other as does the Second. The Jews must throw their lot with those forces in the ranks of the working class really working for the social revolution; that can mean only those forces striving to constitute the Fourth International on the foundations of Marxism and Leninism. In turn the Fourth International is the true spokesman for the Jewish masses who form one section of that oppressed humanity to whose liberation the Fourth International is devoted.
The Jewish masses must recognize that their plight is the obverse side of the plight of capitalism and nationalism in general. The Jews have reached an impasse because the capitalist system as a whole has reached an impasse. It is no accident at all that in its dying agony capitalism should reflect its struggle for continued existence in the form of rampant nationalist chauvinism. Early capitalism found the national state a powerful weapon with which to pulverize the feudal enemy, but also through which it could set up its new system of exploitation on a sufficiently broad basis. The new forces of production needed a wide area as a free market in order to give these forces the chance to grow. The national boundaries shut in such an area for the national capitalists, at the same time shutting off the encroachment of foreign capitalists.
In time these walls became too narrow for the powerful forces of production that developed in all the advanced countries. Hence there arose the system of extending the national economic boundaries by the seizure of colonies. Colonial imperialism thereby served to prolong the life of the capitalist system. But that road to expansion is now inexorably closing. If each country now strives desperately to extend its boundaries for national capitalist exploitation and this striving creates a life and death struggle that culminates in imperialist war, that now means only that the national boundaries themselves have become unbearable chains on society. It means that all further growth of the economic forces, as well as the very preservation of what has been achieved thus far, demands the sweeping aside of the national boundaries. Internationalism has become a necessity for humanity if civilization is to survive. What stands in the way of this necessary development is the capitalist class in each country, holding its possessions in a death grip. No wonder it wants to defend and maintain the national idea, the national boundaries. Its fate is inextricably tied up with those boundaries.
But the appeal to nationalism and to racialism in the advanced countries solves nothing. It can for a time serve to delude a larger or smaller section of the masses, but it is incapable of leading capitalism out of its complete impasse. All the reactionary ideas and programs of rabid nationalism, leading backwards with giant strides toward the Middle Ages, give way to renewed attempts at imperialist robbery. As a cover for this unrestrained plundering, German, Polish, French, all capitalist classes try to persuade their victimized people that the preservation of culture and people is identical with the preservation of the respective capitalism. Precisely the opposite is true. Having reached an impasse, capitalism begins visibly to decay. The accustomed class relationships begin to give way. The golden age of opportunity vanishes into the past and all classes feel themselves suspended over an abyss. The old loyalty of the petty bourgeoisie to the big bourgeoisie is replaced by awful fear and bitter hatred. Hence the ruling class, acting for its self-preservation, attempts everywhere to divert this wrath away from itself by using all the prejudices and hatreds engendered for decades by the capitalist system itself. And the easiest scapegoat is always the Jew.
Hence it is clear that the solution of the Jewish Question is the same identical solution as that for the present world system as a whole. Only the abolition of the capitalist system can put an end to national oppression, which is one expression of political oppression in general. The attempt, while the present system endures, to establish a homeland anywhere on the earth for the Jews, as Palestine amply demonstrates, can only succeed in involving the Jews in all the contradictions of capitalism. And of course it cannot be a solution for the overwhelming majority of the Jews, even granting that it might help that small minority that could find its way to the homeland. For the vast majority are tied down by economic necessity in whatever country they happen to be.
The coming imperialist war, brought much closer by Hitler’s march into Austria, means a catastrophe if anything more profound for Jewry than for any other section of the population. In many lands they will become automatically “enemy aliens” to be herded into concentration camps to starve or to die of plagues of one kind or another. Or they will be driven from their homes without notice by one army or the other, leaving all their little possessions behind. Pogroms are already the order of the day in Europe even before the war, and they have always accompanied capitalist wars. The Jewish masses must enlist in the struggle against imperialist war. For them to follow acquiescently those Jewish misleaders who would place them at the service of one imperialism or the other, would mean to give willing aid in fastening the yoke of slavery on themselves and on others. Nor will silence, in the hope that they will be let alone, help. Their only defense is whole-hearted participation in the struggle against the capitalist oppressors. The cause of struggle against imperialist war coincides with the fight against fascism and for socialism. But that means that the Jewish masses must give their support to and fight with the Fourth International, the only force really opposed to imperialist war, the only force capable of leading the working class and the oppressed to victory in the transformation of capitalist into socialist society.






The letter of comrade Jack Weber, which we are glad to publish here, is of special importance in view of the many years of his prominent service in the revolutionary Marxist movement One of the earliest members of the Communist movement in the United States, comrade Weber joined the Trotskyist movement more than a dozen years ago, and became one of its leading members. Up to the last convention of the Socialist Workers Party, he was a member of the Political Committee of that organization. He has since severed his connections with the Cannonite organization – Ed.



*
Editor, Labor Action
Dear Comrade:
With the greatest interest I read the statement in The Militant on the Nuremberg Trials issued at long last by the Cannonites. It was inevitable that such an explanation should appear, however belatedly. The Great Abstainer, Cannon, had, however reluctantly, to make up his mind in the typical attitude of looking backward.
It would seem to me that the members of the SWP would require just a bit more in the way of explanation. For example, just how does it happen that a Thomas and a Woll (the Cannonites call the statement issued to the capitalist press the Thomas-Woll petition) could take the initiative in a defense that should so obviously have been conducted not by them but by the official Trotskyist movement? That question is all the more pertinent in view of the fact that the American movement has the unique distinction of being the only one that did not participate in the Nuremberg campaign in the entire period of its relevancy.
The initiators of the campaign here were not at all Thomas and Woll. The writer gave it an initial push, but the one mainly responsible and most active of all was James T. Farrell, with active assistance from Meyer Schapiro and Sidney Hook and Max Shachtman. None of us had the slightest doubt that, once the English movement had broken the issue into the open, the Cannonites would not hang back but would enter and take the most active role. They were specifically invited to do so through Shachtman. Why did their statement fail to mention that fact? It was with real amazement that we watched the Cannonites deliberately turn their backs on the issue. The campaign could have taken on a far greater scope than it did had they taken over the leadership which nobody dreamed of denying to them. To his credit Norman Thomas quickly joined in pressing the issue home and his name became associated with it because there was no organized movement other than his own that participated strongly enough. For the Cannonites now to criticize the wording of the petition, after they threw away the opportunity proffered to them, adds just that needed touch, that final touch of irony. Who should have demanded that a representative of Natalia Trotsky be allowed to go to Nuremberg if not they? Who stopped them from doing so?
Are the members of the SWP satisfied with the reasons given for their non-participation? If they examine the matter closely, they surely would not be. The Cannonites were “apprehensive” that the Trial would result in a new frame-up designed to bolster the shaky Moscow Trials. The reason this did not occur, we are informed, is that the sharpening conflicts between Russia and the Allied imperialists prevented any “understanding” of this kind. But throughout this whole period the Cannonite press was headlining these same conflicts and even basing their entire policy on the imminence of a third World War. The reason given is obviously disingenuous. Their handling of the Nuremberg Trial issue shows precisely how the Cannonites play right into the hands of Stalin on the war issue. And not only Nuremberg! Their defense of the Soviet Union becomes – except on formal occasions – silent, implicit defense of Stalinism. It is transparent that they do not state their real reason for abstention on this issue. They were in a dilemma. They were afraid of being classed with the “war mongers,” with those who were “fomenting” discord between Russia and the Allies. Come, now! Weren’t they on the point of calling those who raised such issues social-democratic warmongers? Weren’t they on the verge of denouncing those who made a political issue of the Nuremberg Trials because they felt this to be part of a general campaign against Soviet Russia? In this issue we have epitomized the political ineptitude of Cannon, the inability of the Cannonites to combat Stalinism whatever the circumstances. We leave aside the political cowardice involved in not giving the honest-to- God reasons. One has only to read the letter sent by Dobbs to Goldman on the issue to see how perilously close they came to coming out in opposition to the Nuremberg campaign.
The Cannonites felt “apprehension and alarm” at what might happen at Nuremberg. Surely strange sentiments in a matter of this kind. Feelings that reveal too the helplessness in coping with a situation that led to complete, abysmal silence. Let us assume that the Stalinists had resorted to collusion either with the German prisoners or with the Allies. Or that they could be expected to do so. How in the world does an ostrich policy of abstention give the political answer to such a situation? Even on their own assumptions, the Cannonites showed political paralysis. Did they seriously think that if they started a campaign this might drive the Russians into such a move to tie the Nuremberg and Moscow Trials? Did they seriously think that the thought of using Nuremberg would not occur to Stalin unless the Militant called it to his attention? The proper answer could only have been an immediate forewarning of just such a possible attempt to bolster up the rotten Moscow frame-ups. The Cannonites thought they would better wait till Hess was killed and then raise the question of why the Stalinists had not confronted him on the “conspiracy” with Trotsky and others. It is actually this warped line that the SWP is now following. What stupid myopia!
In their way the Stalinists did try a preliminary experiment at Nuremberg. It had to do with the terrible affair of the Katyn forest, the frightful killing of the Polish officers (unquestionably by the Stalinists). The Russians insisted on pinning this crime on the Germans in the indictment. The Allies refused on the ground that there was insufficient evidence. Finally they told the Russians that the latter could go ahead on this issue entirely on their own account. The result was that, the Russians having introduced the matter into the indictment only for the purpose of using the cover of a general condemnation, later dared not permit the Germans to say a word on this crime. The Germans tried to force the issue on the record, with the Russians obstructing them from answering the indictment. Unquestionably had the Allies played ball on this issue, the Russians would have gone further. But they were deterred by the simple fact that they did not have complete control of the Trials and therefore did not dare expose themselves before the outside world.
 
Play into Stalinist Hands
The real dangers of frame-up are not at all at Nuremberg. The Cannonites failed completely to understand the nature of the campaign. They looked at it in terms of its coming to the actual questioning of Hess and others on the Moscow Trials. Thus the Cannonites miss the point and fail to make the issue clear. The Stalinists would have liked nothing better than the sort of tactics pursued by the Cannonites. The Russians have some of the vast German archives. There is nothing to prevent them, after all the Nuremberg defendants are properly hanged, from saying that they have after considerable search found documents proving the conspiracy between Hitler and Trotsky, etc. They can even invite a Pritt and a Snow to Moscow to view the documents in the Kremlin. The answer to this can only be to warn in advance of the Stalinist methods of forgery. Real political foresight should have consisted – and fortunately did for all but the “apprehensive” Cannonites – in demanding during the Trial while the defendants were still alive, the production of all such documents for confrontation and questioning and scientific verification. The policy of the Cannonites would have played directly into the hands of the Stalinists. Silence during the Nuremberg Trials would have deterred Stalin not in the slightest had he been able to make use of the affair for his benefit. Not even the public campaign will stop Stalin from attempting new frame-ups through forgeries. He is virtually driven to such a course. The German documentation was so complete on every foreign entanglement that Stalin cannot afford not to “find” the documents he needs. But he will find them in his own time where they are not subject to the scrutiny of outsiders.
So much for the Cannonite “strategy” on Nuremberg. Truly something less than pathetic. But there is more to be said. As a matter of fact the Cannonites were unable to move because they had no faith that they could enlist for this cause either intellectuals or labor leaders. They felt themselves completely isolated. Their conduct with respect to the “intellectuals” has been so utterly short-sighted, so crassly high-and-mighty, that they felt it would be useless to appeal for support on this issue. Nobody was more surprised than the Cannonites when they saw the response in the public press. They could not comment until they had caught their breath! Had the campaign been started when the English conceived the idea, the results would have proved astounding. The work of one single girl, Pearl, left virtually undirected because of lack of organized forces, brought in hundreds of signatures in no time at all.
Let us leave in silence – it is only mete and decent – the motives of “prestige” on the lower level of things that kept the heroic Cannonites from following the lead of others – and thereby caused them ignominiously to lose prestige.



 
June 1, 1948


– Jack Weber
 



 



The Great Conspiracy
by Michael Sayers and Albert E. Kahn
Little, Brown & Co., $3.60
It is far from coincidence that the lurid volume called The
Great Conspiracy appears just after the announcement that
Trotsky’s book on Stalin would appear this April. The Stalinists
had their copy of the work on Stalin when it was first issued for
review and then withdrawn. It was easy for them, with their
connections in the publishing field, to secure foreknowledge of the
exact date of release of the book that was banned by the State
Department for four years.
The Great Conspiracy is hardly the work of Sayers and Kahn
alone. They had every kindly assistance from the GPU. The book is a
calculated attempt once again to confuse public opinion. Its obvious
intent is to counteract beforehand the profound effect that Trotsky’s
new exposure of the totalitarian dictator in the Kremlin must
inevitably create. The Stalin work, soberly based on the most
critical analysis of real documents, not blatant frauds, will be the
best answer to the GPU and its hacks. The dispassionate, scientific
spirit evident in. the writing of Leon Trotsky, even when he deals
with Stalin, the most sinister and terrible figure in all history,
dissolves into nothingness the transparent attempt to characterize
Trotsky as almost demented in his “personal” hatred of Stalin.
Sayers and Kahn write:
“He wrote articles asserting that the Soviet leader
derived sadistic pleasure from ‘blowing smoke’ in the faces of
infants. More and more, his consuming, personal hatred of Stalin
became the dominating force of Trotsky’s life. He sets his
secretaries to work on a massive, vituperative 1,000-page life of Stalin.”
No, the dominating force of Trotsky’s life was to guide the
working class toward the achievement of socialism and to help it on
this course by means of complete truth and clarity.
These Stalinist word-men attempt to mask their major objective by
appearing to deal with a broader theme, the secret plotting of war
and intervention against the Soviet Union during the last twenty-five
or more years. This affords them, the opportunity to “set the
stage,” to heighten the atmosphere to the proper degree of
saturation with intrigue, assassination and betrayal. The fetid
breath of the underworld of imperialist politics is breathed on the
Moscow Trials in a vain effort to give them life. Trotsky and the Old
Bolsheviks are bracketed on the one side with the British agent,
Lockhart, the “master spy,” Reilly, the White Guardists, Kolchak,
Denikin, Wrangel and Yudenitch; on the other with the Nazis and
fascists and imperialist reactionaries of all lands. The Stalinists
dare not desist in their clumsy effort to force a vast and fantastic
amalgam down the throat of history.
 
Scholarly Research – Stalinist Style
How can one doubt when there is such an air of scholarly research
about this Great Conspiracy? Just look at the staggering load of
books, papers, documents that went under the heavy mental press of
the authors to be so richly condensed! There are those delightful
footnotes too that do not disturb the even flow of the “main theme”
(the complete Stalinist line to date), and yet add just the right
pinch of “fairness” in alluding, in small print to be sure, to
works that utterly refute the text on the Moscow Trials. With what an
engaging air of bland innocence do the writers inform us:
“None of the incidents or dialogue in The Great
Conspiracy has been invented by the authors. The material has
been drawn from various documentary sources which are indicated in
the text or listed in the Bibliographical Notes.”
This list includes official records of the United States State
Department, hearings and reports of Congressional committees,
official British documents, biographies, newspapers, books and –
“the verbatim reports published by the Soviet government of the
proceedings at the espionage, sabotage and treason trials which have
taken place in Soviet Russia since the Revolution.”
Taken as official documents, after all, are not those of the
Soviet government just as good and authentic as those of other
governments? That naïve logic will influence, of course, only naïve
people. The truth of any document rests on itself and all its
relations to facts, events and other documents. The Sisson documents
became for a brief spell official United States affairs – until
their fraudulent nature became so obvious that they had to be thrown
out as forgeries. Those documents – what irony in relation to the
Moscow Trials! – purported to show that both Lenin and Trotsky were
mere German agents. To this day the trial records exist showing the
conviction for murder of Sacco and Vanzetti. Yet not a single
thinking person accepts their conclusion, although on their basis
these two martyrs were executed. The Mooney trial is another case in
point. The Dreyfus affair is also part of history. Yet objection will
be made that there were no confessions in these trials. But the
history of the Inquisitions presents the most fantastic confessions
of all time and who today, including the fathers of the Church, would
quote as truth those old “official” documents. Indeed the nearest
analogy to the Moscow Trials is precisely that of the Witch Trials of
the Inquisition. Sayers and Kahn mention but completely ignore the
conclusions of the Dewey Commission that all the Moscow Trials were
false, and an attempt to frame up Leon Trotsky. These Stalinist
scholars, in short, make not the slightest faint effort to analyze or
sift or weigh the documents that they choose to present. Their
assigned task is to narrate the proper versions.
We readily agree that the Stalinist writers did not invent
anything themselves. They merely use the inventions of Stalin and his
GPU from start to finish. But if they are ordinary copyists in this
respect, they have nevertheless the proper light-fingered touch in
their use of material. A minor detail will reveal that “slant” on
“documents.” They quote Lenin at the Congress of Soviets in
December, 1920, as calling for the New Economic Policy and then
advocating the speedy electrification of the country.
“There was a huge map of Russia on the platform. At a
signal from Lenin, a switch was touched and the map was suddenly
illuminated. It showed the Congress how Lenin envisaged the future of
his country. Electric lights sparkled on the map.”
This scene is taken “verbatim” from a motion picture of rather
late Stalinist vintage. It never existed in this form and is
obviously entirely out of keeping with Lenin’s simplicity. The mind
of Lenin needed no “shows”!
 
The Lie Spread Backward
Stalin has carried “The Lie” back so as to make it appear that
the struggle against his Thermidorean apparatus was the continuation
of an older struggle carried on against Lenin. Trotsky is to be
exiled, if Stalin has his way, not only from Russia but from all
history. Thus they would like to make it appear that Trotsky was
opposed to Lenin on the New Economic Policy. In reality it was
Trotsky who had first proposed such a change to Lenin a year before
its adoption. The authors repeat with their instructors: “When
Lenin announced the ‘temporary retreat’ of the New Economic
Policy, Trotsky exclaimed: The cuckoo has cuckooed the end of the
Soviet government!” Trotsky’s speech shows that he, with Lenin,
considered the move a temporary retreat. The expression is evidently
torn out of context and given a distorted meaning, for Trotsky
understood that the Whites abroad would hail the new policy as the
end of the regime. It was they would would “cuckoo” the end of
the regime, not Trotsky.
The greatest contempt for the reader is revealed in the deliberate
confusing of terms and times, indicating the reliance of the
Stalinists on sheer ignorance. The word “opposition” is made a
catch-all to link together an the oppositions that existed at various
times on different issues and with different persons involved.
Specifically the attempt is constantly made to link up every other
opposition with the Left Opposition which was established on the eve
of Lenin’s death not as an opposition to Lenin (as Stalin wants it
to appear) but, on the contrary, to become the instrument of both
Lenin and Trotsky against Stalin. Lenin died before the fight to
remove Stalin (as proposed by Lenin to Trotsky) could be started.
Trotsky then continued the struggle through the Left Opposition as a
faction within the Communist Party. Sayers and Kahn commit the fraud
of insinuating and then accepting as authentic the identity of the
Left Opposition with the Left Communists who opposed Lenin during and
after the peace of Brest-Litovsk, and with other oppositionist
groupings that existed be fore Lenin’s death. This projection
backward in history is the rotten fruit of the later Moscow Trials in
which all the oppositions, right and left, are lumped together and
made to appear as a united group from the very start, fighting first
Lenin and then, by inheritance, Stalin. One form of The Lie is given
as follows: “First as Foreign Commissar and then as War Commissar,
Trotsky was the chief spokesman of the so-called Left Opposition
within the Bolshevik Party.” The Left Opposition led by Trotsky did
not exist when he was Foreign Commissar and began only after Lenin
died. History is thus again and again ante-dated in accord with the
needs of the later frame-ups.
 
The Will of Lenin
The question of “inheritance” brings to mind the famous “will”
of Lenin. The authors, in line with the needs of The Great
Conspiracy against Trotsky and Bolshevism, arrive this late at
the denial that such a testament existed. Naturally, since it is so
damning to Stalin’s pretensions at being the follower and disciple
of Lenin. The teacher took exceptional care in this instance to
disown the “pupil”! There is the letter in which Lenin broke off
all relations with Stalin. There is also the testament urging the
party to remove Stalin as general secretary. These scribblers know
how to omit real documents and to hide the fact that Stalin was
forced to produce the testament and have it read before the Central
Committee of the Bolshevik Party in 1927. More flagrantly they leave
in darkness Stalin’s own admission published in the official organ
of the Comintern, the International Press Correspondence for
November 17, 1927. A speech of Stalin’s is there quoted as follows:
“It is said that in the ‘testament’ in question
Lenin suggested to the party that it should deliberate on the
question of replacing Stalin and appointing another comrade in his
place as general secretary of the party. This is perfectly true.”
The other comrade was to be one whose qualities Lenin posed in
sharp contrast to those of the “rude and disloyal” Stalin.
You will look in vain in this “historical study” for the
replica of another document in which Lenin showed such complete trust
in the Commissar of War, Trotsky. It was given without request during
the Civil War when Trotsky was meeting with opposition engineered
from behind the scenes by Stalin. Trotsky never used the document
which was a blank sheet of paper with an endorsement at the bottom
signed by Lenin, as follows:
Comrades: Knowing the strict character of Comrade
Trotsky’s orders, I am so convinced, so absolutely convinced, of
the correctness, expediency and necessity for the success of the
cause of the order given by Comrade Trotsky that I unreservedly
indorse this order.
This simple document is enough in itself to refute all the frauds
and forgeries attempted by Stalin in his desperate effort to besmirch
the name of Lenin’s co-worker. The totalitarian dictator uses all
the weight of the government, all the power of the reactionary
bureaucracy, to recreate history in his own fell image. Psychologists
of the future will be faced with the problem of explaining why Stalin
found it necessary, after usurping the power of the October
Revolution, to try to have attributed to himself all the great deeds
of Trotsky while, on the contrary, attributing to Trotsky all the
murderous deeds of Stalin. The Great Conspiracy is but a new
effusion devoted to this ignoble task. Its shoddy structure can be
readily demolished by the truthful use of actual documents. The very
breadth of the fraud it attempts to perpetrate involves so many
contradictions internally as well as with well-established facts that
it is all the easier to expose.
 
Trotsky as Pictured in the Frame-Ups
How could Stalin rest with the Moscow frame-up trials which tried
to picture Trotsky as plotting at one and the same time with France
and England, and with Germany and Italy against the Soviet Union, and
yet leave alone the Trotsky of the Revolution and the Civil War?
Trotsky himself predicted that the “plotting” attributed to him
would be carried back further and further to show him as a foreign
agent even under Lenin. Stalin found this all the more necessary in
order to convince the world that the struggle against him was really
the continuation of the same struggle against Lenin. Thus we have a
hobgoblin parade of bizarre fantasies, insinuations, innuendos,
distortions. What an amazing man, this Trotsky of the Great Stalin
Conspiracy! At one and the same time he is the agent of Germany
during Brest-Litovsk and yet plots with Anglo-American imperialism
through Lockhart and Reilly, not merely for intervention as against
Germany, but for outside aid in overthrowing Lenin! He is in
conspiracy with all of the defendants of the Moscow Trials at one and
the same time – with Bukharin and Rykov on one side, with Zinoviev
and Kamenev and Radek on the other, and with the Social
Revolutionaries of Left and Right, not to mention the White Guards
and Mensheviks. And all this support remains secret; it is never out
in the open. The Stalinists never stop to explain how such a Trotsky
needed anything more to displace Lenin, had he so desired, but the
majority in the ruling institutions of the period. The figures later
done to death by Stalin formed a majority of the Executive Committee
of the party as well as of the Soviet. There is one explanation, one
which casts shame on Lenin. Stalin pictures him as a dictator who,
like himself, kept all in check!
The startling talents of the imaginary Trotsky pictured by people
apparently suffering from nightmare, are shown after he has lost
power and is in exile. Let us quote from the Sayers-Kahn condensation:
From the moment Trotsky left Soviet soil, agents of
foreign intelligence services had been eager to contact him and to
make use of his international anti-Soviet organization. The Polish
Defensive; the Italian fascist Ovra; the Finnish Military
Intelligence; the White Russian émigrés who directed anti-Soviet
secret services in Rumania, Yugoslavia and Hungary, and reactionary
elements with the British Intelligence Service and the French
DeuxiÃ¨me Bureau were all prepared to deal with Russia’s “Public
Enemy Number One” for their own purposes. Funds, assistants, a
network of espionage and courier services were at Trotsky’s
disposal for the maintenance and extension of his international
anti-Soviet propaganda activities and for the support and
reorganization of his conspiratorial apparatus inside Soviet Russia.
A powerful man, indeed! All the governments of the world ready to
support him in all kinds of ways – except one! A trifling detail.
They all unanimously declined to provide him with so simple a thing
as a haven, a refuge from which to carry on such multifarious
activities! England never invited him. He was driven out of France
and Norway after very brief sojourns. Germany allowed him in neither
before nor after the advent of Hitler to power. Only little Mexico
permitted his entry, and that under the exceptional period of
Cardenas’ rule. Trotsky was and remained a man without a passport.
Is it possible. we ask somewhat timidly, in the light of the mass of
“evidence” so lavishly supplied by the GPU, that all these
governments had an even greater fear than Stalin of the power of the
revolutionary ideas of the co-founder of the October Revolution?
 
Study in Innuendo
We highly recommend the book of the two historians of conspiracy
to every student of law as a source book in the study of innuendo.
Examples tumble over each other. Trotsky is quoted from the Dewey
Commission Report, The Case of Leon Trotsky, as follows:
“Monsieur Thome and Monsieur Cado, the general
secretary of the police and the prefecture of the Department of
Charente Intérieure-all the summits of the police were very well
acquainted with my situation. It was the secret agent of the police
who was informed of every step of mine.”
Clearly here is the admission of a link with the secret police of
France! The unsuspecting reader would never know that Trotsky was
forced to agree to report his every whereabouts to the French police
in order to be permitted to stay in France. Nor would it be inferred
from the quotation that Trotsky had demanded in his defense that the
French police make public all that they knew of his itinerary while
in France precisely in order to refute the charges hurled at him
during the Moscow Trials. Finally, let it be remembered, it was
precisely the Franco-Soviet Pact in existence during the trials, that
kept the mouths of the police firmly shut in aid of the “ally” of
France, Stalin.
There is unconscious humor in the purported conversation of
Rakovsky with a Japanese Intelligence officer in Japan, and in the
pictured plight of Ambassador Yurenev. The officer supposedly says to Rakovsky:
“I must ask you to write to him (Trotsky) that our
government is dissatisfied with his articles on the Chinese question
and also with the behavior of the Chinese Trotskyites. We have a
right to expect a different line of conduct on the part of Mr.
Trotsky. Mr. Trotsky ought to understand what is necessary. There is
no need to go into details, but it is clear that an incident provoked
in China would be a desirable pretext for intervening in China.”
Sadly the Moscow Trial of Rakovsky does not relate just how
Trotsky changed his writings on Japan and China to suit the Mikado.
It is, of course, a matter of record that he firmly supported the
Chinese against Japanese imperialism and predicted the defeat of
Japan. The innuendo in the quotation, as used, does not concern
Trotsky’s writings. It is rather the slur cast on the Chinese
Trotskyists that they somehow or other (the details are unnecessary!)
created the pretext for the Japanese penetration of China. These
drops of poison are never distilled any further.
Rakovsky supposedly reports these matters to Ambassador Yurenev.
By this time the stories concocted (at Moscow, not in Tokyo) have
reached such fantastic proportions as one lie piles up on the other
like a ship wrecked on the rocks, that comment on the contradictions
become unavoidable. The prosecutor therefore has a “depressed”
Yurenev saying to Rakovsky:
“We have gotten into such a mess that sometimes one
does not know how to behave! One is afraid that by satisfying one of
our partners we may offend another. For instance, here at present
antagonism is rising between Great Britain and Japan in connection
with the Chinese question, while we have to maintain connections both
with the British and the Japanese Intelligence Services ... And here
I have to find my bearings in all this!”
Neither Vyshinsky nor Stalin could help them out of such a mess –
of lying testimony!
 
Laying the Foundations – After the House Is Built
The real service performed by this Stalinist manual lies in the
fact that it tries to bridge the glaring gaps left from one trial to
the next. Thus the evolution of The Lie becomes quite apparent. Each
trial witnessed “full and honest confessions” on the part of the
defendants brought into court. Yet each new trial went back over the
previous one to show that the confessions bringing convictions, even
of death, had not been one-tenth enough. This peculiarity of the
trials needed explanation. The explanation, need we say, we usually
even more fantastic than that which needed explaining. The trials
therefore present the appearance, with all the clever workmanship of
the writers after the fact, of constructing a house starting with the
roof and working down deeper and deeper into the foundations. Sayers
and. Kahn try to correct this weirdness by recounting the “relevant”
parts of the later trials before presenting the “verbatim”
accounts of the earlier ones. How stubborn real time can be in
refusing to reverse itself at the behest of the all-powerful GPU!
We are here concerned with the eight trials based on the Kirov
assassination in 1934. The previous trials of the Industrial Party
and the Mensheviks showed the same elements of frame-ups and
preparation for the later ones. The Menshevik Trial also reversed the
time order by showing “witnesses” meeting with two persons long
dead. It showed Abramovitch ignoring the laws of space by appearing
in Moscow when even the Soviet press had his picture as being in
Brussels. These are minor details which Sayers and Kahn feel no need
to discuss since they do not appear in the “official” versions of
the trials.
The eight trials were those of Nikolayev and others in December
1934; that of Zinoviev-Kamenev in January 1935; the trial of Medved
and other GPU men in January 1935; that of Kamenev and others in July
1935; the retrial of Zinoviev-Kamenev in August 1936; the Novosibirsk
trial of November 1936; the Pyatakov-Radek trial of January 1937; and
the Bukharin-Yagoda trial of March 1938.
The assassination of Kirov was followed by the death of 104 “white
guards.” The public was given to believe that the whites were
responsible for the plot. It came out in the course of the Nikolayev
trial, however, that he was a member of the Communist Youth
organization. The minutes of his trial were never published, but not
a single word at the time attempted to link the others with the plot.
A frame-up was tentatively tried, but quickly dropped. The indictment
stated that Nikolayev had been approached and helped by a Latvian
consul, Bisseneks. This consul offered to transmit a letter abroad to
Trotsky, with whom he claimed to be in touch. Nikolayev did not
write. Bisseneks disappeared abroad and was never heard of again.
Wisely, Sayers and Kahn ignore him completely. The GPU touch was too obvious.
Stalin next brought Zinoviev and Kamenev to trial in January 1935
for the same assassination. They were made to confess “moral guilt”
in helping to create an “atmosphere” in which terrorism could
breed. Not a word was said about actual complicity with Nikolayev;
not a word about terrorist plots; not a word about sabotage; and not
a single word about links with foreign governments. There followed
the trial of some Leningrad GPU men who had known about the plot to
kill Kirov in advance, but had failed to take proper precautions. The
minutes of this trial never appeared and it is not even mentioned by
our two scribblers. What did appear in no way implicated the GPU
officials of having participated in the actual plot. That came later.
 
Introduction of Sabotage
Kamenev was dragged back from prison in July 1935 to face trial on
the same issue. This time he was accused of a terrorist plot against
Stalin. Nothing was published on this trial at all. Sayers and Kahn
do not mention it. It was a mere rehearsal for the later trials.
Zinoviev and Kamenev were again haled to court – from prison – in
August 1936. By this time they were ready to confess – no evidence
ever appeared, new or old – that they had participated in terrorist
plots, including that against Kirov. They were sentenced to death.
Here again not a single word appeared on sabotage or on links with
foreign governments to bring about intervention, etc.
Accusations of sabotage appeared for the first time in connection
with the Old Bolsheviks in the Novosibirsk Trial of November 1936.
Pyatakov appeared as defendant in this trial and in die later one of
January 1937. The last two trials added confessions not merely about
the defendants then alive, but also for the men already killed,
Zinoviev, Kamenev and others. They were charged after their death
with all the other crimes “admitted” for them by apparent
co-conspirators who had not even been tried with them. Pyatakov,
Bukharin, Radek “confessed” terrorist plots as in the previous
trials, but added sabotage, wrecking activities, treason abroad.
The Great Conspiracy is an addition to the trials. It
relates them backward, giving the final version as an introduction to
the very first one. Its function becomes quite understandable. The
trial of Nikolayev is given in a single paragraph. Then we find the following:
“The Military Collegium sentenced Nikolayev to be shot.
Nikolayev did not divulge the fact that Zinoviev, Kamenev and the
other leaders of the Trotskyite-Zinovievite terrorist center had been
directly involved in the plot to murder Kirov.”
Such a statement might strike one as a queer description of a
trial if there had not appeared on the preceding page a portion of
the “testimony” of the later trials used to link them together.
Bakayev in the 1936 trial “explains” this as due to instructions
from the ill-fated Zinoviev:
“The principal task is to organize the terrorist work
so secretly as to preclude our being compromised in any way ... When
under examination, the main thing is to persistently deny any
connection with the organization. If accused of terroristic
activities, you must emphatically deny it and argue that terror is
incompatible with the views of Bolshevik-Marxists.”
If this “explains” Nikolayev’s silence, how does it explain
why Bakayev, released from all vows since Zinoviev and Kamenev had
confessed to their terrorist center themselves, did not reveal still
more? This contradiction at a later date required the invention of a
still more secret “parallel center” not mentioned at all in the
earlier trials.
The fore-shortened description of the first Zinoviev trial is
followed by its explanation:
The trial had only scorched the surface of the
conspiracy. Among the many facts which the Leningrad trial failed to
bring to light, perhaps the strangest were these: When Zinoviev and
Kamenev were arrested, four agents of the Soviet secret police had
brought them to NKVD headquarters. The agents were Molchanov, chief
of the secret political department of the NKVD; Pauker, chief of the
operations department; Volovich, assistant chief of the operations
department; and Bulanov, assistant to the chairman of the NKVD. In
arresting Zinoviev and Kamenev, the four NKVD men acted in a most
extraordinary fashion. They not only failed to search the apartments
of the suspects for incriminating material; they actually permitted
Zinoviev and Kamenev to destroy a number of incriminating documents
... Still more remarkable were the records of these four NKVD agents.
Molchanov and Bulanov were themselves secret members of the
Trotskyite-Right conspiratorial apparatus. Pauker and Volovich were
German agents. These men had been specially picked to make the
arrests by Henry G. Yagoda, the Chairman of the NKVD.
Need we add that this “information” came at the later trial of
these GPU men and that Yagoda was tried only still later in March 1938?
It is a tenet of science to accept the simplest explanation, the
one involving the fewest number of assumptions. Stalin and his GPU,
unfortunately for their trials, paid not the slightest heed to this
well-recognized doctrine. That is why the trials left so sour a taste
and could not be swallowed by the world at large. The trials were
characterized by Trotsky as “conversations about conversations.”
Not a scintilla of actual evidence was ever produced. The “links”
between trials were intended as answers to world criticism on this
and other scores. The attempts to allay world suspicion in this
fashion were themselves so obvious and. so bizarre that they served
to confirm suspicion all the more. The hypothesis that the trials
were GPU frame-ups conformed too well to the known facts to be swept
aside. The defendants are all dead, Trotsky murdered in Mexico by a
tool of the GPU. The Stalinist need to have the world accept the
verdict of the trials remains. The Great Conspiracy against Trotsky
and the other leaders of the October Revolution continues. But its
brazenness is far from carrying conviction. The repetition of the
exploded lies concerning Pyatakov’s flight to Norway in an airplane
that never existed; the lies concerning a meeting between Trotsky and
Romm in Paris, when Trotsky proved he had not been in Paris at the
time; the lies about meetings in a Hotel Bristol in Copenhagen
that no longer existed at the time, etc. – all this calculated,
bare-faced effrontery convinces nobody.
Nobody? There are the Stalinists and their close collaborators,
the Browders, the Sayers and the Kahns. Browder, even after his
expulsion from the Communist Party, finds it necessary to reaffirm
his belief in the Moscow Trials. Sayers and Kahn have every
confidence in their verdicts, or so they say. These people should be
the very first to welcome every new opportunity to secure new,
objective corroboration of the trials. Such an opportunity presents
itself at this very time. The defendants at the later trials
confessed that they had made contact with the Nazis through Hess,
Rosenberg. and others. They gave “testimony” that Trotsky and his
son had met with Hess and plotted with the Nazis for war against the
Soviet Union. The Nuremberg Trials offer a new ground for a test of
the Moscow Trials. Not only are all the Nazi leaders, and
particularly those involved in the “confessions,” in the hands of
the Allies, but even better, all their archives seem to have fallen
intact into the hands of the Court. Will not Browder, Sayers, Kahn
and all the Friends of Stalin join in requesting the questioning of
these witnesses and the production in open court of all relevant
documents? It has been made clear through what has been produced,
that the Nazis, true Germans in this respect, kept the most
meticulous records of conversations and agreements. Why not ask the
defendants whether there ever were such records, and if so, what
became of them?
Not the Stalinists have made this request. They have remained as
silent as the grave on this matter, showing how much real confidence
they have in the possibilities of producing proof. It has remained
instead for the English section of the Fourth International to make
demands of this kind on the Court at Nuremberg. It has remained for
men like H.G. Wells and Arthur Koestler, James T. Farrell, Oswald
Garrison Willard and Norman Thomas – all of them disbelievers in
the Moscow Trials – to challenge the Russian prosecutor and the
Russian judge, who form part of the Nuremberg staff, to produce
proofs. There are those who fear that the Russians may make a “deal”
with the Nazis on this score. We fear nothing that the Stalinists can
do, for everything can be subjected to the same scientific, critical
analysis to which was subjected the material, or rather lack of
material, of the trials themselves.
The Stalinists must of necessity pile fraud on fraud to cover up
all the lies of the past. The Great Conspiracy is evidence that they
are impelled to drown with noise and bluster, with calumny and
innuendo – and with murder when no other remedy suffices – the
voices of truth and honesty. Let no one think that we speak here of
the Nazi scoundrels in the criminal dock at Nuremberg! Those beasts
deserve the death that will be meted out to them. But it is
nonetheless important that they be questioned before their sentence.
The Stalinists have too black a record for the suspicion not to arise
that after the death of the figures mentioned at the Moscow Trials,
documents will not be forged as the “proof” completely lacking at
the trials themselves. That is why it is necessary to demand that
questions be put to the men in the dock before their death. Every bit
of their testimony can be subjected to scientific analysis and
judgment, including anything they may say about documents bearing on
the case.
The world cannot forget the Moscow Trials. Their infamy remains a
dark blot on the conscience of humanity. The real verdict can only
come with the end of a regime, the regime of the totalitarian
bureaucracy headed by the Kremlin dictator. History will vomit forth
with the bloody clique that usurped the October Revolution, its own
image of fraud and frame-up as painted by itself in the Moscow
Trials. The vindication and victory of the Bolsheviks will be the
resurgence of the proletarian revolution dammed up by the Stalinists.
Jack Weber
March 15, 1946
 


 The Lovestonites have been engaged in reexamining their attitude on the war. Revolutionary Marxists are accustomed to such a procedure, its purpose in their case being to strengthen the strategy and tactics of the working class to meet new turns and developments in the class struggle. But this is emphatically not the aim of the “Independent” Labor League of America. The voluminous discussion carried on in the Workers Age reveals this group shifting over the helm so as to ride more comfortably with the stream. Far from being concerned with the political independence of the working class in the most acute phase of the class struggle, the Lovestonites engage in giving their “independent” reasons for half-hearted support to one imperialist side as against the other. Reasons aside, this has been the ideological procedure of the petty bourgeois radicals from the very outset of the war. The “Independent” League is merely the latest to fall in step and it is not yet in full stride. It has first to pass through that uncomfortable period in which the old uniform is properly cast aside and the new one donned.   
“Principles—But Not Now!” It was Bismarck who said: “To accept ‘in principle’ means in the language of diplomacy to reject in actuality.” This applies with perfection to the Lovestonites. Principles above all, but not now! We stand by our principles, but we must face the actuality. Marxist analysis is correct, but we must not be rigid about applying it in the next six months. Let us dip into this muddy well S. Meffan writes (July 20):
“I quote this because I believe traditional Marxist analysis can be applied to the present world situation, but that most traditional socialist cure-all slogans might as well be thrown in the ash-can.”
That is, the doctrines we accepted for years must now be cast aside. The situation has changed and they have become “cure-alls.” Meffan obligingly illustrates with the Leninist heritage of the first imperialist war of which the present one is the continuation. Revolutionary defeatism, we are told, is not a principle but merely a tactic which cannot be applied now. At bottom this can only be interpreted as meaning that the working class must not attempt to seize the power during the war. The very way in which Meffan poses the problem (and this applies to all the Lovestonites) shows the dependence of these petty bourgeois ideologists on the capitalist class and its aims and actions. “So the question is, I repeat: Under what conditions can the socialist movement benefit most or suffer least?” That is, victory of the Allied capitalists or the fascist imperialists. How can we suffer least? That is the momentous decision involved in their whole discussion. Like all the others Meffan starts with an account of the reactionary nature of the imperialist war, the aims of both sides, the fact that an allied victory would also result in a totalitarian society—but not to the one and only genuine brand of Hitler totalitarianism!
“Socialists would have a much better chance in a Europe run by a harassed (!) ALLIED dictatorship than in a Europe run by Hitler’s well-oiled Nazi machine.”
And Meffan believes seriously that he is using the method of Marxism when he at the same time ignores all the lessons (the cure-alls) learned at such cost in the past. Every single great event of the past period warns the working class that to tail behind any section of the capitalist class is to do so at the risk of utter rout and defeat. The capitalist system in decay poses before us one all-embracing problem: what independent course must the workers in each country pursue to save civilization by ridding the world of capitalism. All that the Lovestonites can ask is which of the capitalist countries decay less rapidly and must therefore be supported—or not resisted! Under which regime will we suffer the least—the sum total of the independent politics of Lovestone and Co.
The complete perversion of Marxism is seen in the wind-up of Meffan’s argument. Apparently the war has reached the stage, for the Lovestonites, where the power is no longer in the hands of the national capitalist class but in the hands of “the people.” (We will see this also in Lovestone’s brainstorm.)
“What of England? I believe the slogan of revolutionary defeatism has no meaning there any more than in France. I do not know exactly what socialists in England are doing, but in line with this article it would seem that revolutionary defense (if we must have a slogan) should be the order of the day.”
In a feeble attempt to sugar-coat this monstrous idea, Meffan explains that he means the advocacy by the workers of the sort of peace only possible if the workers had the power. The Independent League would thus tie the working class to the capitalists even to the extent of covering up the real aims of those actually in power, their imperialist robber aims, with the aims of the workers. Revolutionary defensism by the workers of their exploiters in the seats of power!! This is the aim held in common with the Labor Party ministers who dragoon the proletariat to fight the war for the imperialists.   
Gorkin, Who Supported People’s Front The same issue of Workers Age contains an article by the POUMist Gorkin. There is a spicy piquancy in its utterly correct condemnation of the Popular Front in France, in view of the fact that Gorkin participated so actively in the Popular Front in Spain which betrayed not a potential but an actual revolution. With painstaking accuracy we sum up Gorkin’s article: “We must hold fast to our principles but we must not act according to them.” He himself places the two in violent contradiction:
“We cannot fall into either of two errors: an underestimation of present-day realities in the name of principles, or a lapse from principles under pretext of present-day realities.”
The principles must continue to exist and to make their way—but not in this world! Gorkin tells us:
“The only possible peace is a socialist peace, and this can be attained only by the revolutionary destruction of capitalism.”
If this were meant for anything more than a decent piety, he would have to add that the only way to achieve this is not by a passive, fatalistic, “lesser evil” policy but by active, independent, positive revolutionary politics on the part of the workers and their leaders, particularly where they still have their own class organizations. If Hitler appears so powerful today, it is only because as yet there exists no organized force inside Germany to combat him. What does Gorkin propose? A peace today would mean a Hitler peace.
“The proletariat can, therefore, neither desire nor support such a peace which would seal its fate of slavery and postpone the hour of its revolutionary emancipation.”
How combat a Hitler peace?
“Six months or a year more of war would undoubtedly weaken their (Hitler and Mussolini) regimes, despite past victories, and would place the Italo-German proletariat in a position to initiate their own revolution, coincident with the revolutionary struggle in France (written before the final collapse of France) and in the colonies.”
A short six months will now suffice Gorkin. And what preparations are necessary in this brief space of time? None. The only remaining organized proletarian forces must show the German workers what can be done by playing possum and not moving an eyelash. We must leave to the English bourgeoisie (and socialists) the task of holding on so that the workers can benefit from a Hitler defeat.
“We must not from near or far (!) solidarize ourselves with British imperialism and with the war it is conducting against German-Italian imperialism. This imperialist war, today like yesterday, is not our war. But in the present situation, we must not systematically oppose its continuation. Nor can we oppose the shipment of war materials from America to England. Everything which will contribute to the weakening of the power of Hitler and Mussolini and to the liquidation of the material conditions and the moral effect of their victory is progressive, revolutionary.”
If it is progressive, nay revolutionary, why not whole-heartedly support it? Gorkin proposes to leave the task of downing fascism to the English bourgeoisie, and on top of that not to give them any active help. The answer?
“This, of course (of course!), does not represent a betrayal of our principles and of our political line, which we must maintain with the greatest firmness.”
What political line does Gorkin mean? Firm opposition to the class enemy, the main enemy, the one at home? No, that is to be postponed—for six months only! We have always preferred the outright ‘principled’ opportunists to the hypocritical, completely bankrupt variety. But since everything in this world is relative, Gorkin is almost principled compared to some of his confreres.   
Brazen Class Collaborationism To see class collaboration not in shame-faced but in brazen form, one has to read the ignominious Herberg. The same Herberg, we must remind the reader, whose principles permitted him knowingly to condone the bloody frameups against the Russian Bolsheviks by Stalin (until they were exposed against Herberg’s opposition) on the ground that these frame-ups would be forgotten in a century or two when the Revolution would be acknowledged to have been a tremendous step forward. Unbelievably Herberg revives the old Lovestone theory of American exceptionalism. We thought this so well buried that it would have been indecent on our part to disinter it. Here is its present form, after all the years of crisis.
“If we (who?) can so reorganize our economic and social system as to provide jobs for those who are able and willing to work, opportunity and a future for the youth, and a measure of security, welfare and freedom for all, we will have no reason whatever to fear the advent of fascism in this country no matter what happens in Europe.”
Herberg is talking not about the socialist era after the revolution but about American capitalism in 1940.
“If America manages to keep out of the blood-bath in Europe it may still be able to play a powerful part in saving the world from utter ruin after the war.”
The “independent” policy of Herberg thus consists in advising, calling upon the American capitalists to utilize their power and their system for the true benefit of the masses. After Hitler demonstrates that the fraud of autarchy was merely preparation for imperialist war, Herberg proposes that the United States take over this fraud from Hitler and establish its own economic system free from the rest of the world. Herberg suggests that the ruling class here give up its imperialist aims. His is a voice unhappily lost in the wilderness. This ruling class is entering upon a new stage involving the most gigantic arming ever seen to prepare for imperialist adventure. Today the course of America is clearly charted; the United States will surely enter the imperialist war, unless the workers take the power away from the capitalists in the interim, be it six months or two years. Short of that, the United States threatens to become as totalitarian as any of the states of Europe. Here as elsewhere only the workers can defeat fascism by defeating their own capitalists and taking power. Lovestone propounded; his theory of exceptionalism on the eve of the greatest economic crisis ever experienced; Herberg proposes it anew on the eve of American entry into the imperialist war. This pleasant theory enables Herberg to make a division of labor. The workers here must see to it that America stays out of the war. But Herberg graciously approves the efforts of the English socialists in furthering the cause of national defense. Herberg will not permit his own capitalist government to lend any aid—he will leave that to the socialists of England. Such is the internationalism of this Lovestonite.   
Least Common Denominator Jay Lovestone’s attitude distinguishes itself from that of Gorkin only in being more demagogic and hypocritical. Part of the essence of Marxism consists in distinguishing clearly between the aims of the capitalists and those of the workers in each situation, and advocating those policies which will further the aims of the workers as against those of their exploiters. All that Lovestone does is to jumble together the aims and tasks of the capitalist imperialists with those of the proletariat, a process that leads only to lulling the working class into passivity.
“What we want most as a result of this war is the social revolution.—But what we fear most is a Nazi victory with its total destruction of all democratic rights and labor organizations, with its liquidation of the national independence of many countries.”
In mathematics we call this kind of reasoning finding the least common denominator; namely, defeat of Hitler.
“Our categoric opposition to a Nazi triumph does not mean that we should dedicate ourselves to the cause of an Allied imperialist victory. Our resolute opposition to a Nazi triumph does not mean that we look forward to an Allied victory as the solution of the basic problems—” 
To arrive at a least common denominator Hitler is endowed with exaggerated power, as is the case with all petty bourgeois ideologists.
“A Hitler triumph would totally preclude the likelihood of a social revolution, while a Nazi debacle would offer fertile soil for a proletarian revolt—despite any desires, maneuvers or moves to the contrary by the Allied ruling classes.”
The soil remains quite fertile for revolution under Hitler, but the task becomes more difficult and requires more time, no doubt. But Lovestone proposes to utilize the remaining democracy and the remaining legal organizations of the workers in England, for the purpose not of guaranteeing a victory for the workers by preparing for the taking of power, but rather to assure a victory for Churchill. This wily capitalist meantime prepares behind the scenes to maintain capitalism, whether in victory or defeat. Already he shows his fangs to the Laborites in parliament. If he is victorious, he will hand the Laborites their dismissals and will clamp down on their constituents with the best brand of totalitarianism. If he is defeated he has prepared beyond question for the same kind of military dictatorship that appeared in France after defeat, and which was prepared for in advance. Finally, should the workers threaten Churchill with downfall at home, he will make every effort to hand England over to Hitler for preservation of the capitalist system. Isn’t it clear that any support to the Churchills leads the workers into a trap, an impasse? This is the era of the decay of capitalism, says Lovestone. Yet, the bourgeoisie, despite themselves, can play temporarily a progressive role. In this case the English and French bourgeoisie would play the progressive role of overthrowing Hitler—for the working class! Lovestone winds up with a gem of thought—he advocates a “belated and thin” victory for the Allies. We will not embarrass him by asking him what a belated and thin victory looks like. Nor are we told who is to keep it thin and how. No doubt to keep the victory properly thin Lovestone will not permit the United States to join in the fray. He thinks American capitalism should stay out of the war, in order to preserve the labor movement here and the legal conditions under which it still flourishes.
“Our enemy is at home.” Quite correct, says Lovestone. But there are also other enemies of the working class, in this case the Nazis, more dangerous at the moment. Only after defeating this enemy will the workers be able to turn later on their “final” enemy. Lovestone then reminds us of Marx’ attitude in the Franco-Prussian War and Lenin’s on the defense of Kerensky against Kornilov. The analogy with the Franco-Prussian War let us dismiss at once as specious. The age of creation of national unity and national states in order to strike the finishing blows against feudalism and to permit capitalism to grow, is long past. In the present resumption of the first World War we witness a phase of the death agony of capitalism. Not a single feature of the imperialist war is progressive. As to the Kerensky analogy it is sheer fraud. With far more justice than is the case now, Kerensky tried to argue that if Russia were defeated in the war, it might mean defeat for the revolution and the restoration of czarism by the Germans. Lenin demonstrated for all time that the most certain way to preserve the revolution was to carry it thru to completion and to establish the workers’ power firmly, despite defeat in the war. If this applied in backward Russia, how much more it would apply in advanced England. Can anyone doubt for a moment that the surest blow at Hitler would be a proletarian revolution in England or any other country? In the Kornilov affair there was involved not an imperialist war between Kornilov and Kerensky (the true analogy is with Kerensky and the war), but a civil war with the workers playing an independent role. Even while “defending” Kerensky, Lenin and Trotsky prepared openly to overthrow Kerensky by strengthening the Soviets and arming the workers. In what way does Lovestone pursue a course of strengthening the dual power of the workers?   
Lovestone and Churchill Does it make a difference who wins the war? To American capitalism the difference is so great that they plunge headlong into arming to the teeth in fear of a Hitler victory. To English capitalism a Hitler victory would bring bankruptcy. If Hitler loses then German capitalism is rendered impotent and bankrupt. Who will impose totalitarianism on the English workers if England is defeated? We repeat: behind the scenes Churchill is already preparing to do this whether in defeat or victory. Tomorrow English capitalists will combine with Hitler to enslave the workers. If England wins, Churchill will perform the same service for German capitalism. Behind the question there lurks in reality a substitution. What worker would not prefer a democratic regime to a fascist one? Is there a difference between democracy and fascism? Of course. But is the imperialist war a war between democracy and fascism? Squirm as he will, Lovestone answers basically: Temporarily, yes. In short he equates the imperialist war with an ideological war. Having done so, he seizes on every pretext to make it so. Churchill, you see, is arming the entire British people for defense. This puts a new face on matters.
“In a conflict between an armed British people—the decisive majority of which is the working class—and the savage Nazi bandits, no self-respecting, no class-conscious worker can doubt or hesitate for a moment where he stands or whose victory he wants.”
This is nothing more than a way of psychologizing the idea of an ideological war between democracy and fascism. We are for the arming of the entire British people, including those in the colonies, but we are unalterably opposed to the use of these arms to further the interests of the imperialists. We shall expose every attempt to call the war of the capitalist governments over imperial plunder a war of one imperialist government against “the people” of the other.
Basically there is nothing new in all the arguments of these shabby opportunists. They say they are not for English imperialism, only against German. The social chauvinist David used precisely the same expression in voting the war credits to the Kaiser in the last war. He was “not for the war, but against defeat,” in order to preserve the German labor movement. How well it was preserved by the social democrats we know. Lenin devoted himself to combatting this form of working class betrayal in the last world war. He said:
“The petty bourgeois viewpoint differs from the bourgeois one—outright justification of imperialist war—in that the petty bourgeoisie renounces annexations, ‘condemns’ imperialism, ‘demands’ from the bourgeoisie to cease being imperialistic while remaining within the framework of world imperialist relations and the capitalist structure of society.”
This applies to all the defenders of bourgeois democracy today, including the Lovestonites. Their present attitude is merely the bridge to their attitude tomorrow. If it was correct for the English socialists to aid their government, how much more correct it will be to aid the United States government in a war with Hitler if England is defeated. The working class can find no solution of its problems of life and death along this path. Support to the “democratic bourgeoisie” in this war means support to the narrowing down of democratic rights to the point where there is no longer any difference between the democratic and the fascist country. The way to preserve democratic rights is for the workers to defend these rights against their own bourgeoisie, their own main enemy. Only the proletarian revolution can bring about the doom of fascism, whether in Germany or elsewhere. The task of defeating Hitler remains the task of the workers, not of the bourgeoisie.


 JAMES BURNHAM, the author of the following letter, was the chief theoretician of the group which, after a seven-months’ discussion in the Socialist Workers Party, refused to abide by the decisions of the Third National Convention of the party, held in April of this year. The group was suspended until it would signify its intention no longer to violate the convention decisions. Now its chief theoretician has drawn the final conclusions from the position around which the group was organized. The letter is published here for the first time. The “Workers Party” group to which it is addressed, our readers will recall, insisted during our pre-convention discussion that all party discussion shall be held publicly before the workers. No sooner had they left us than they had a good opportunity to do so, by publishing Burnham’s letter to them. Strange to say, they did not.
 
Text of Burnham’s letter  
BURNHAM’S letter of resignation from the self-styled “Workers Party” adds the expected period to his break with Marxism and his desertion of the working class movement. What better commentary could there be on the nature of that group which followed Burnham out of the Socialist Workers Party than the fact that they did not dare to print his letter of resignation from their group! Burnham’s letter is overwhelming confirmation of our previous characterization of the splitters.
Burnham was the only one of the group who had any real views in the factional struggle that preceded their defection. Shachtman refused to take any stand on the basic questions in dispute. So clear was the course followed by Burnham to the “theoreticians” of the “Workers Party” that they were willing to follow him out of the movement and to embrace him in a new party. Burnham felt embarrassed, nay distressed, by their devotion, but nevertheless he has wrenched his coat-tails violently from their grasp. He has said finally and at long last what he really had in mind (and what the Socialist Workers Party had deduced correctly), and now has said it in such unmistakable terms that the light at last dawned on his associates and it became at long last to Shachtman “crystal clear that he has abandoned the struggle against war and for socialism”—when Burnham told him so and not before. One might suppose that Shachtman would offer some sort of apology or explanation to his misguided followers for his defense of Burnham against the now-proven predictions which we made, that Burnham was on his way out of the movement. But no! It turns out that Shachtman was quite open-minded in his association with Burnham and was merely waiting for “time alone to tell what (Burnham’s) future role in the movement would be.” Time obliged. It obliged at breath-taking tempo.
The record speed with which Burnham jettisoned the whole cargo of Marxism is in its way an index of the heightened tension of the class struggle as the United States rushes headlong towards entry into the war. The capitalist ruling class, facing a mortal struggle, has set in motion every single agency at its command to suppress resistance to its aims. Already the work of provocateurs is added to the barrage of Fifth Column propaganda and the usages of the FBI. Open violence has thus far occurred on a small scale—but that is a harbinger of the future. Burnham’s course stands revealed now as the process of giving way to this class pressure and then yielding completely to it.
In vain the failure of the “Workers Party” to print Burnham’s letter of resignation! Can they hide from themselves the patent fact that they were led by an element who, under the test by crisis, turned tail and fled the movement? The statement of the Workers Party can be characterized only as a cynical attempt to suppress the plain lesson to be learned from the Burnham defection. Not even the simple sentence: “We made a mistake.” That means an unprincipled persistence on the same false course.
The ideological line of retreat from the movement pursued by Burnham has its dialectic significance. The pressure of alien classes is almost invariably reflected in a Marxist party by attempts at revision of Marxist theory followed by proposals to change practical policies. Burnham’s first break with Marxism occurred when he attempted to characterize the Soviet Union as a “bureaucratic” state that was neither working class nor capitalist. At first he insisted that he still accepted the Marxist class theory of the state, but that Russia was an exception. Soon this theory reflected itself in politics. Under the furious outcry of petty-bourgeois democrats against the Stalin-Hitler pact and the invasion of Finland, Burnham refused to lend support to unconditional defense of the Soviet Union against imperialist attack. The Socialist Workers Party rejected this reflection of petty-bourgeois ideology inside its ranks. In short order Burnham found himself forced by his own logic to generalize his attitude—to reject the Marxist theory of the state, then to abandon the materialist conception of history and the theory of class struggle. Relentlessly the dialectics of the class struggle forced Burnham out of the camp of the working class.
Burnham half-heartedly acknowledges in his document, in what he hopes will be accepted as an engaging manner, that his action is based on the desire to quit politics. When a class-conscious worker becomes disheartened, he generally does retire from politics and becomes apathetic. In the very letter of resignation that takes Burnham out of the ranks of the workers, however, he speaks of an article for the press. Assuredly, as an intellectual, the professor will continue to write and express opinions publicly. And he is perfectly free to do so. But we insist on precise evaluations. Burnham has quit, not politics in general, but proletarian politics. His Third Camp proved to be only a brief resting place for his trek back to the camp of the bourgeoisie, more accurately the camp of the petty-bourgeoisie. In company with them he already holds that reformism, Leninism, Stalinism, Trotskyism are merely “variants” of Marxism. Furthermore (the next stage in his logic!) Stalinism and Fascism are but twins, manifestations of the same “general historical forces.” He is at present in the mood of “doubt” as to whether Leninism and Trotskyism belong to the same category—but since “time alone” resolves these questions, give him a little time!
His reference to a “managerial” society can be characterized at once as complete capitulation to totalitarianism, exactly as the Stalinists capitulated in Germany to make Hitler’s victory inevitable. Burnham says now that he never accepted the philosophy of Marxism. In actuality what he means is that he never had any real faith in the workers and in their agility to carry civilization forward to the next stage, that of socialism. Since he never had this faith we cannot accuse him of losing it. Fundamentally it is this mistrust of the masses that drives Burnham into acceptance of the “probability” of a “managerial” society as the next step in history. Burnham confuses the pressures inside his own cranium with the forces of history. He thinks “Marxism must be rejected” because of all the Burnhams past and present who have abandoned it. To an entirely different world belongs the faith of the working masses: they cannot permit civilization to slide back into barbarism but must carry humanity forward, despite temporary setbacks, to socialism.




Imperialist Objectives ...
The Hearst yellow press expresses most openly and brazenly the alms and objectives of American imperialism. Ever since Roosevelt’s recognition of Soviet Russia, dictated by the Japanese seizure of larger and larger slices of China and the futile attempt of American capitalism to call a halt to this process of political pressure, Hearst has been engaged in a vicious counter-propaganda to bring about the breaking off of this recognition. The recent decision of the boss class to push Japan into a war of intervention against the Soviet Union, as manifested by the withdrawal of consuls and military aides from Russia and the serving of notice for all the imperialist world that America did not contemplate a military alliance with Russia against Japan, was hailed by the yellow press as a first step in the right direction. Such articles as those of Representative Tinkham of Massachusetts attempting to prove the “repeated breaking” of the Litvinov pledge not to aid or foster any organization having as its aim the overthrow of American capitalism or the American government, were designed to press for etill further reactionary steps against the Soviets. And now to climax the black wave of chauvinism set in motion by the imperialists, there appears the article by the American Imperialist admiral, formerly commander of the Hawaii Naval Base, Yates Sterling. Every worker should read carefully this epitome of the major objectives of the American capitalist class in the coming war.
 

The Call for War ...
In essence Sterling issues a call to arms to capitalism against the menace of Bolshevism and proletarian revolution. This is the fundamental conflict of our epoch, the international outcome of the class struggle – the victory either of communism or of capitalism. In terms of this basic issue Sterling appeals to the nations of Europe – that is to the capitalist ruling class – to close the ranks, to present one united front against the Soviet Union. It would be a terrible blunder, he feels, for the capitalist nations to permit themselves to be divided into two camps by their relatively minor clashes of interests. “Soviet Russia remains an important, if not the most vital factor in any plan for the stabilization of Europe, yet the doctrines of Bolshevism ever remain a menace to all capitalistic nations. Will the rest of Europe divide against itself and give Russian propaganda an opportunity to drive a Red wedge between the divisions?” The American admiral then indicates how capitalism may revive its waning strength at the expense of Russia and China. Germany must convince the rest of Europe, in particular France, that her arming is solely for use against the Soviets.
“If Germany can make Europe believe that her rearming is against Russia, and that Russia is a great danger, might not the Little Entente fly asunder and realign itself with Germany against a common enemy – Communism? Where then will be the Franco-Russian pact?” Where indeed! Stirling hopes fervently for the appearance of a leader (Hitler ) with the driving power to unite capitalism under a single banner. “In the guise of such a great crusade, maybe yet inarticulate in men’s thoughts, cannot one see the outlines of a daring plan not only forever (forever, Admiral?) laying the ghost of Bolshevism but for opening up the fertile lands of Russia to a crowded and industrially hungry Europe?” The Marxist could set forth no more clearly the way in which capitalism hopes to issue from its general world crisis – by the method of war and plunder, the subjugation of the peoples of the Soviet Union and Asia. This is the only method known to imperialism in its desire to maintain the system of exploitation. The imperialists look with greedy eyes on the one-sixth of the globe under the banner of the Soviets, thereby cut off from capitalist exploitation and the making of profits. Stirling shows how the war will start the wheels of industry going – for the purposes of human and material destruction. The tens of millions of lives that will he sacrificed in this “crusade” will be counted well spent by the imperialists if they are shed for the preservation of a system rapidly decaying towards barbarism.
 

American Preparation
The United States is preparing just as feverishly as the other capitalist nations for the next world war. These preparations are not merely of a military technical nature. Stirling shows clearly the preliminary arrangements of political objectives in the coming catastrophe. It is no accident that Sterling writes in this fashion at this time. The American ruling class is preparing internally also for the conflict that will determine its future in Asia, its life or death. The scrapping of all pretences that the government seeks the “betterment” of the masses, the casting aside o! the shams of the NRA, the open and more and more brutal attack on the working class in this country, are all preparations also for the next war. The ruling class shows its mailed fist internally and externally to its greatest enemy, the world proletariat. And first and foremost to the American working class.
 




England Ends Versailles Treaty
Hardly one week after the Tories took over the British government the new foreign minster, Hoare, resorted to direct action to resolve the contradiction between the reality of German rearmament and the fiction of the maintenance of the Versailles Treaty. The tripling of the German navy is “legalized” by the Anglo-German agreement. In this fashion British imperialism tries to solve a number of its problems, external and internal. Faced with the possible danger of a new naval race in the North Sea with a resurgent German militarism, British capitalism preferred to make concessions relatively harmless to herself, even if a menace to her former allies. England thus takes one step further in encouraging Germany to seek the salvation of its capitalism by expansion to the East, at the expense of the U.S.S.R. A German navy of the size permitted means the control of the Baltic Seas, hence the possibility of attacking Leningrad safely.
At the same time the English ruling class serves notice to France that the latter had better come to terms also with Hitler and abandon the Soviet Union to its fate. This act makes of the Franco-Soviet pact virtually a scrap of paper, for in that pact France can “legally” be released from its operation in case England and Italy refuse to define the aggressor in the coming war. England is doing everything possible to force France to repudiate the military alliance with Stalin. Internally the British tories are preparing for the coming general elections. They can point to the naval agreement as being one step in the direction of limitation of armaments, which adds nothing to the British naval budget at the moment. If the tories are successful in the elections there will be an entirely different aspect of things after the elections. The naval race will then be resumed full speed ahead.
 

Stalinism Grovels Before Imperialism
The nearer the war of intervention, the more desperately the Stalinists grovel before world imperialism to prove that the Soviets are not really a menace to the bourgeois ruling class. Ambassador Troyanovsky, former Menshevik and fit representative of the corrupt Stalinist bureaucracy, assures America that the Soviet Union under Stalin is merely the continuator of the policies of the Kerensky Provisional Government. And in this he tells the truth. The Stalinists are engaged in erasing every trace of the October Revolution in order to prove their worthiness to exist side by side with reactionary world imperialism. As the preliminary to further concessions to reaction, the Stalinists are proceeding to annihilate physically all Bolshevik oppositionists, past or present. This can only mean a further attack on the working class in the Soviet Union, an added preparation for the betrayal of this working class as well as the world proletariat to bourgeois reaction, solely for the purpose of maintaining in power the reactionary Stalinist bureaucrats.
Only one force stands in the way of Stalin and endangers his “success” in blocking the road to power of the proletariat of Western Europe. That force, still small but growing in influence through the power of its correct Marxist approach to the revolutionary tasks of the working class, is the nucleus of the Fourth International, the inheritors of the militant traditions of the Second and the Third Internationals. To the Stalinists the Fourth International is a greater menace than capitalist imperialism. The next wave of revolution, organized under the banner of the new international, will sweep out of power and into utter oblivion the corrupt bureaucracy that exists only so long as the workers suffer defeats. The venomous hatred manifested by Stalin for the “Trotskyists,” the attempt to confuse the workers by slanders and by lumping together the counter-revolutionary imperialist robbers and the Bolshevik-Leninist vanguard – the two extremes of the class struggle – are themselves the recognition that the Stalinists will have to pay for their crimes the moment the workers become aware of them.
The Fourth International alone can accomplish this necessary task of ridding the working class of the poison and treachery of Stalinism. It is the builders of the Fourth International who alone can forewarn the advanced workers against the betrayers who are already sowing the seeds of social patriotism in preparation for the next war. The justifiers of the Franco-Soviet Pact, the lackeys of Soviet diplomacy, are working, in the interests of a privileged clique, to fasten more firmly on the necks of the workers the yoke of capitalism. The Stalinist Defenders of the Soviet Union are ready to become also the Defenders of the Allies of the Soviet Union, the upholders of French militarism. With England already openly tossing aside the Versailles Treaty, the Stalinists are becoming the champions of this treaty insofar as it aids Stalin in his reactionary alliances with capitalist imperialism.
 




The War for Colonies
The general world crisis of capitalism of 1907 produced or rather intensified the fierce life and death struggle for colonies among the advanced imperialist countries. Each country hoped to prolong the existence of the system of exploitation at home by attaining and exploiting larger controlled markets abroad. Thus the crisis of capitalism was transformed into the first world war in 1914. This war was preceded by “skirmishes” in various parts of the globe, particularly in Africa. In the so-called Moroccan crisis of 1911, the needs of German imperialism forced the Kaiser into the notorious Agadir incident that almost precipitated the war at that time.
Now again the general crisis of capitalism has sharpened all antagonisms and posed more sharply than ever before the contradiction between highly developed productive forces and closely restricted markets. To secure access to new markets the great powers find it necessary to prepare for war, one against the other, so as to break the grip of their rivals on the more desirable colonies. Japan proceeds steadily, as yet unchecked, with plundering of China – and America looks on waiting the opportune moment for intervening. Germany looks first of all to the Bast of its borders, to the Ukraine and to Central Europe, or the expansion that will save its capitalism from complete decline.
Italy has turned to an African adventure in Ethiopia for its share of plunder. In a general way Mussolini’s attack on this African semi-colony may well be compared with the Agadir incident as the prelude to the second world war. It is not enough for fascism to prevent revolution at home with its complete destruction of the capitalist system of exploitation by the proletariat; that represents only the political condition for the continued existence of the bourgeoisie. Fascism knows no other way to solve its economic dilemma than the same methods pursued abroad that it pursues at home. Capitalism cannot exist without resort to plunder and warfare.
 

Ethiopia and the Powers
Italy did not begin its wolf’s leap at Ethiopia without first securing the consent of England and France. All the present sham of British opposition and its “sounding out” the other powers in the League of Nations concerning the application of economic penalties and “sanctions” to put a stop to Italy’s further measures, is characterized even in the capitalist press as so much face-saving for its own masses. Of course it is also intended to wring other concessions from Mussolini for the British lion. What these are will probably not be known for some time. But one can hazard the guess, knowing the direction of English diplomacy at this time, that England is trying to separate Italy from France in order, the better to exert pressure on isolated France to split it away from the Soviet Union. A crusade against the Soviet Union would be least dangerous to England – or so its ruling class supposes – and would enable England to “recover” by becoming the workshop for supplying the needs of a war-torn Europe.
The abrupt and chilling reply of Roosevelt to the appeal of Ethiopia for the application of the Kellogg-Briand Pact of Paris illustrates not merely that this country, under bourgeois rule, is no more interested in peace than any of the other powers, but that it is to the interest of America also not to become involved in complications in Europe and Africa when the ruling class here is forced to concentrate its entire attention on the knotty problem presented by Japanese penetration of China. Furthermore Italy’s move at this time is a blow at Japan, just beginning its thrust toward Africa through Ethiopia. American capitalism is therefore somewhat sympathetic towards Mussolini.
 

Civilizing Ethiopia
The fascist leader, Il Duce, who found it unnecessary to hide his aims and methods when it was a matter of knifing the Italian proletariat, now employs the usual imperialist hypocrisy of carrying civilization to the conquered colony. Mussolini, enslaver of the entire Italian working class and the most hunger-stricken peasantry of Europe, will be the “Abraham Lincoln” of Ethiopia. He will “free” the large number of slaves held in bondage by the exploiting rulers of Abyssinia. He will “free” them from their present masters to place master and slave alike under the yoke of Italian capitalism. That is all that the bourgeoisie can carry to the colonies – a system of exploitation more intense, more cruel and costly in human life than any previous system. It is only the world proletariat that can bring real civilization to the colonies. When the workers throw off the yoke of capitalism at home, they will at the same time strike off the chains of the colonial peoples. The proletarian revolution will not only destroy the bourgeois exploiters at home, but will aid in the destruction of the colonial ruling classes, feudal or bourgeois. It is as much the task of the workers to accomplish the freedom of the colonial peoples as their own.
 




War Technology
Modern warfare when it involves the advanced capitalist countries is no longer a matter of winning battles. It is far more the pitting of the national resources and national technologies against each other. The control of coal and iron, of cotton, copper and oil – of the “strategic” materials – becomes of major and decisive importance. The threat made by the rival imperialists to cut off Mussolini’s oil supply is a reminder of this fact. It is also a reminder of the careful planning for future war made years in advance by the military arm of each government.
The United States, for example, has its plans laid in the minutest fashion for the complete mobilization of the necessary industries the moment war breaks out. Contracts for all war materials need only to be signed to start, the production schedules already agreed upon with individual factories. The “Commodity Files” division of the United States Army keeps the most up-to-date information on volumes of production of all commodities, the sources of supply, the stock piles in the warehouses, the percentages used for various purposes, etc. This department is entrusted with the task of seeing to it that sufficient supplies can be made immediately available at the outbreak of war to carry on the war for two years even if the country be completely blockaded (an impossibility in the case of the United States) and no outside sources can be tapped. Even more, this department, in collaboration with the navy, sees to it that the necessary ships are sent to keep open the channels of communication with those countries which supply necessary foodstuffs or raw materials. In this connection all of South America comes under the complete domination of U.S. imperialism through its naval supremacy in continental waters. Plans are even ready for the seizure of those countries or parts of countries that produce strategic materials. Canada with its monopoly of nickel, Bolivia and Chile with their tin, lead and nitrates would fall easy victims.
* * *

Labor and the War Plans
An important aspect of this planning is the economic side of production. The allocation of finances in the government budget is based on careful consideration of prices in connection with increased output. Greater production of any commodity can always be stimulated at a price. But this means that the government becomes interested in controlling prices as much as it can in time of war. The calculations of the imperialists and their military subordinates take into account particularly wages. Every strike tends to become a blow struck at the entire plan for making war profitable. Control of production for purposes of destruction means above all to the big financiers who actually run the government, the keeping of a tight rein on the working class. It means the attempt to destroy any organized resistance to the well-laid plans of capitalist profiteers, to check the workers in any effort to maintain their standards of living or to improve them. More than ever the everyday struggles of the workers against the exploiters becomes a menace to the entire capitalist system, since these efforts of the oppressed to better their conditions disturb the smooth functioning of the system at a most critical time. Thus war forces the capitalists – their fears aroused both at home and abroad – to exert the utmost powers of their dictatorship to keep the workers in subjection. The class struggle takes on sharpened form; strikes tend to become political as well as economic battles; the workers who enter into the struggle see more clearly the oppressive role of the government as the instrument of the ruling class. These lessons are being drawn today by the Italian workers. They have experienced terrific blows at their living standards. Mussolini’s plans for imperialist conquest are at the same time plans to rob the working class even more than In time of peace. That is the inevitable fate of every working class in time of peace.
* * *

War in the Far East
The situation in North China has reached a critical stage. The Japanese are determined to seize the five northern provinces under the usual fakery of “autonomy,” the cherished formula of the Japanese imperialists. But they would like to accomplish their ends with as little fuss as possible, with the “consent,” if possible, of Chiang Kai-shek. This pliant tool of the Japanese army is, however, in a quandary. He is witnessing the removal from his control of the richest provinces of China, Shansi and Shantung, provinces which supplied him with a lordly Income. One hundred million people are being torn away to be exploited by the Japanese war-lords instead of the Chinese. The blow at the “prestige” of this dictator would be great indeed if he submits without a struggle. The utmost pressure is being exerted on him, both from within and from without (America and England) to fight in order to hold off the Japanese bandits as long as possible. There, is a split in the Kuomintang, the Nationalist Party of China dominated by Chiang, over this issue of war against Japan. The Japanese are not anxious to see Chiang make the decision to fight and hence they are exerting every form of threat to make him submit peacefully This is the issue that now hangs in the balance. War now would find the Chinese working class pitted against Japan, but at the same time struggling also against the betrayer, Chiang Kai-Shek, to replace his government by one that would truly fight to the end against Japanese and all other imperialism.
 




Gerard on Radical “Dog-Hunt”
James W. Gerard, former U.S. Ambassador to the Kaiser’s Germany, wants to introduce the terroristic methods of German Fascism into America. This agent of the capitalist ruling class sees the class struggle assuming more open, more sharpened form here too in no distant future. Hence lie takes the opportunity in an address of “welcome” to some newly naturalized citizens in Jersey City to inject the proper note of terrorism against the militants of the working class into his speech. He warns that “those who will not conform to the institutions of this country, who seek to overthrow our government and substitute some foreign communism, will soon be hunted like mad dogs in our streets.” What the upholder of American capitalism means by “conforming” is obvious. He means that the employed workers shall submit to the wise guidance of the bosses when they deem it necessary to cut wages and lengthen hours; that they shall not attempt to better their lot by daring to organize into unions and to strike against the oppressors and exploiters. He means that the eleven million unemployed shall starve patiently on the miserable dole given in a spirit of Christian Rooseveltian charity, without making too much of an organized nuisance of themselves to disturb the parasitic upper crust of capitalist society. Gerard would exterminate the Marxian vanguard, those “mad dogs” who might spread the virus of revolt among the other “dogs,” the working and toiling masses. Gerard’s fears, needless to say, arise not because of any foreign importation of communism into America from abroad, but because the same struggle for power by the proletariat is inherent wherever the capitalist system exists, in the United States as well as in Europe. And when the struggle becomes clear to the workers, they will know how to defend themselves against the “dog hunters,” how to answer the Fascist white terror of the Gerards. They will set up their own institutions and their own standards of conformity.
* * *

Hoare’s Faux Pas
The ex-Foreign Secretary of Great Britain has been sacrificed by the reactionary Baldwin government to prolong the life of the present cabinet. Hoare failed to act with that proper savoir faire, that hypocritical ease in saying pleasant nothings while committing evil deeds that is the recognized hallmark of bourgeois diplomacy. The great crime of Hoare is to have revealed in brutal nakedness just what the Baldwin government meant all along.. The elections having passed, Hoare felt it unnecessary to pretend any further that British imperialism has the slightest interest in the Ethiopians or in anything but the power and the pocketbooks of English capitalists. The resignation of the Foreign Secretary does not mean in any sense that the intentions of Baldwin have changed or that the actual proposals to give Italy half of Ethiopia were “wrong.” All it means is that the necessary amount of diplomacy, i.e., of sham and fraud, will have to be used to cloak these real designs and to cloud them in secrecy. The game will be played with greater astuteness by the left-over Edens and Chamberlains as a result of the fall of Hoare. He is symbolic of the power of British cant and hypocrisy whose roots extend deeply into the labor movement as well as into bourgeois circles. Only those who really represent the deepest interests of the masses are not interested in fooling the masses. Only, that is to say, the Marxist vanguard.
* * *

Outer Mongolia
The visit of important officials of the Soviet government of Outer Mongolia to Moscow is but a sign of the ominous nature of the situation in the Far East. However extended the theater of war, when it breaks out, between Japan and the Soviet Union, Outer Mongolia will be an important part of it. The Japanese army has long declared its intention of strangling the Soviet maritime provinces by cutting off their communication with Russia and the Ural region. This could be best accomplished by means of a campaign through Outer Mongolia to cut the Transsiberian Railroad. In self-defense against the Japanese bandits the Soviet government has been laying tracks parallel to those of the Transsiberian, but further north. In addition railroad lines are being laid by both Japan and the Soviets to be ready to pour troops into the Mongolian sector. The seizure of North China by the Japanese robbers has the two-fold aim of laying the basis for the further gobbling up of China, and for more extensive preparations for invading Siberia. War in the Far East seems only a matter of the briefest time. If Japan invades Outer Mongolia – and this seeing to be the intention of the Japanese army – the incident will be provided that will set the world ablaze in a war of intervention against the Soviet Union. European repercussions would not be long in following. All the moves made by England with respect to Italy have as their dark background the next stage of developments, with Hitler Germany preparing to strike at the Ukraine. England would like to see a solid front of Germany, France, Italy and herself against the Soviet Union, with Hitler acting as the spearhead of conquest and reaction. Workers must be on the alert to aid in the defense of the Soviet Union.
 



The Plundering of China
The sequence of events in the East makes perfectly clear that the denunciation of the Washington naval truce by Japan was merely a way of serving notice to the imperialists that the militarists of Japan intended to go forward more rapidly in their plundering of China. The attack on Chahar is a further step in the encirclement of China and advances the Japanese army closer to Inner Mongolia and the caravan route along which China might secure help from the Soviet Union. Following the brazen assault on Chahar, there come the “conversations” in Nanking between Japanese Minister Ariyoshi and Chiang Kai-Shek. The demands made on the Chinese hangman of the proletariat are exact, repetitious of some of the notorious twenty-one demands made in 1915 with the purpose of reducing China to the status of a Japanese colony. China must withdraw from the League of Nations (so that it cannot appeal for help to the other powers), she must substitute Japanese advisers in place of the American and European military, economic and engineering advisers, the Chinese army must be “remodeled” and all military equipment bought from Japan, Manchukuo must be recognized, and the Chinese must accept a new railroad loan from Japan. These are the demands made public. In addition it is required that China see “eye to eye”, with the Japanese militarists in regard to the international situation in the Far East. The coming war against the Soviet Union is too close at hand for the Nippon generals not to seek in advance to guarantee themselves against attack from the rear. Every move made in China thus takes on the character of preparation for the war against the workers’ state.
 
A Victory for Hitler
It was a foregone conclusion that with the coming to power of Hitler in Germany, the fascists would commence a program of rearmament in violation of the Versailles Treaty. For fascism, the outright and most violent form of the dictatorship of finance capital, can only retain power nationally by waging war internationally so as to expand its markets and thereby preserve the decaying national capitalism.
The protests of the powers victorious in the last war fell on deaf ears while Hitler proceeded with the program of militarism in Germany. At first, quite hidden, the war preparations became more and more an open diplomatic “secret” that created consternation in the chancelleries of France and Britain. The meeting in London between the premiers of these two countries has resulted in a substantial victory for Hitler. Flandin has agreed with the British to abrogate the arms clauses of the Versailles Treaty, except that which calls for the demilitarization of the left bank of the Rhine. Germany will have to rejoin the League for this forced concession, a meaningless gesture which Hitler will not find difficult to make. Hitler can now devote his sole attention to the preparations for the attack on the Soviet Union.
What effect all this will have on the relations between Soviet Russia and imperialist France remains to be seen. All the great diplomatic victories of Litvinov – at the expense of the world proletariat – may soon crumble to ashes.
 



Roosevelt’s Open Offensive Against Labor
Nothing restores the feeling of strength and confidence to the capitalists so much as the flow of profits into the tills. The American ruling class was willing to submit to the inconveniences of the NRA and the demagogy of the New Deal, holding out illusory promises to the despairing worker, only so long as it was necessary to tide over a, dangerous period of crisis. Now that the bosses scent the possibilities of an upswing of business, they have exerted the utmost pressure on their government to sweep aside the paper concessions made to labor and to put the workers back in their places. This became perfectly clear when Roosevelt obeyed the voice of his masters (Ford, Sloan, Swope, etc.) and blocked the attempt to organize the unorganized workers in the mass production industries – steel, autos, machinery – by legalizing the company union. Roosevelt was seconded in his attack on independent unionism by the class collaboration policies of those lackeys of capitalism, the A.F. of L. bureaucracy But the next move of the capitalist government in its attempt, to bring about “recovery” (of profits) in the basic construction industries, is directed not against the extension of unions into new fields, but at the very heart of the old A.F. of L., the unions of the once well-organized building trades workers. In accordance with the general Internal reorganization of American imperialism with its drive on the living standards of the entire working class, Roosevelt has now taken over the task of restoring profits to the building contractors by a drastic drive on the wages of the workers in this field. This means an attack on the very existence of the unions in the building trades.
* * *
Shall the Unemployed Be Used Against the Employed?
The method to be used in this drive is to pit the unemployed against the employed workers. Roosevelt proposes that there shall be no more direct relief in the form of doles, but that relief is to take the form of pay for public construction work. Under the thin disguise that the worker is not to be discouraged from accepting private employment, it is proposed that the wage rates on public construction be considerably less than prevailing rates in the different localities involved. Actually fifty dollars a month has been set as the proper rate. The A.F. of L. has met this menace in its usual style, by attempting to use the backstairs method of congressional amendment to the Roosevelt proposal so as to establish a “prevailing rates” clause. Unless this Is combined with the rallying of the entire working class, employed and unemployed, into a mass movement of protest and militant action against This open offensive of the capitalist class, the bosses will succeed In their plot against the unions. Here is a clear-cut issue on which all workers can be united. Our Party must take a leading role in strengthening the unions of the building trades workers and aiding them to resist the concerted drive prepared for long in advance by the propaganda of the contractors and construction monopolists.
* * *
New Methods of Unemployed Work
In this connection our whole task among the unemployed assumes a new and more concrete aspect. By its present tactics the capitalist state, through Roosevelt, offers us a means of uniting the employed and the unemployed in a common struggle. It becomes clearer than ever to the employed workers that it is necessary to secure cooperation of the unemployed. The employed workers must, through their unions, offer every help to organize the unorganized in relief workers’ unions as auxiliaries to the regular unions. Our answer to the attempt of the bosses to destroy the building trades unions by utilizing as tools the unemployed in the form of relief workers, must be the complete organizing of the unemployed as well as the employed to secure higher wages for both. The recent militant strikes of relief workers in Arkansas for higher pay give us excellent reason to believe that our task is one that will meet with ready response. Already the organizations of the building trades workers are seething with revolt against the direct blows aimed at them by Roosevelt.
* * *
The Workers and the State
It is clear that Roosevelt no longer finds it necessary to even appear to cater to the A.F. of L. bureaucrats. When it becomes necessary in the eyes of the capitalist class to make a drive directly forward against the A.F. of L. unions, the A.F. of L. “leaders”, only yesterday sitting at the same table with the bosses and their government representatives, are unceremoniously shown the door. The resulting outcry of “Judas” on the part of the labor fakers is quite understandable. But the workers face a problem more difficult, but more educative, than ever before. Their enemy now becomes the combined force of the capitalist class and its political expression, the capitalist state. The building trades workers will find themselves mare and more in conflict with the state itself. It becomes clear that the government must take on a more and more repressive character to achieve the bald and undisguised aims of American imperialism.
 



A Year of Struggle in France
February 6 will mark exactly one year since the political crisis that changed profoundly the course of the class struggle in France. On that date, utilizing as a pretext the Stavisky scandal that had stirred the masses to the depths, the forces of reaction accomplished by a coup d’etat the overthrow of the “radical” socialist government of Daladier and its replacement by force by the Doumergue government. The rioting of the reactionaries on February 6 was answered by the tremendous demonstrations of the working class in the week following.
But the Doumergue government, aided by the capitulation of the petty bourgeois parties, remained in power and proceeded to establish a dictatorial, anti-parliamentarian regime. Doumergue, attempting to prepare the way for fascism more rapidly than class forces would permit, was in turn voted out of power by the attenuated parliamentary regime still existing, and his prototype Flandin took office as premier. Flandin carries out the function of opening the road to fascism.
* * *
The United Front
The course of events, the imminent menace of fascism, aroused among the masses a strong sentiment for militant action. The lessons of Germany and Austria were too near at hand for the workers to permit a reactionary victory without strong resistance. By the pressure of the masses the two major working class parties – the Socialist and the Communist – were compelled to enter into a united front to combat fascism. The Communist League of France (Trotskyists) threw its forces into the French Socialist Party in order to exert its influence in the united front to counteract the opportunist policies of the bureaucracies of the two parties by proposing and fighting for revolutionary policies leading towards the defeat of fascism and the taking of power by the working class.
 
Alliance with the Bourgeoisie
The policies pursued by the leaders of the two parties in the united front have tended not to lead the masses in militant struggle, but on the contrary to lull them into inaction. Both bureaucracies, starting with a non-aggression pact not to criticize each other at all, are unwilling to aim at establishing workers’ power – the only method of defeating fascism. Instead, the two leaderships prefer to uphold bourgeois democracy, the one because of its entire nature historically, the other due to the needs of Soviet diplomacy to maintain the French military alliance.
Recently the Communists took the initiative in adding to the united front the Radicals and the Radical-Socialists, both parties of the petty bourgeoisie. The Socialist Party, taking its cue from the C.P., has accepted this situation without much opposition. This is the surest way to give the victory to the reactionary forces and to bring about the bloody defeat of the proletariat. Under the guise of the common interests of the youth, the Young Communists of one Paris District have actually held meetings in common with the fascists organized in the Patriotic Youth.
* * *
The Anniversary
The French masses are waiting expectantly for February 6. It is possible that the fascist Croix de Feu and Francistes and other organizations may attempt, as they have threatened, to demonstrate their power anew on this date. This would undoubtedly bring a fresh current of struggle and resistance into the ranks of the proletariat. Unless the workers are aroused from the apathy into which they seem, on the surface, to have sunk in recent months, fascism may march forward at faster pace. The recent riots at Chartres give the first signs of renewed street battles which will take on a wider mass character in the days to come.
* * *
Sugar Workers Strike in Porto Rico
A dramatic strike movement grips the island of Puerto Rico, where the colonial slaves of Wall Street have again rebelled. The sugar plantation workers were the first to strike. One by one the majority of the sugar centers of the island have been paralyzed. Stevedores and truck drivers have struck in solidarity with the plantation workers. The movement is marked by great militancy; canefields are being burned; clashes between workers and scabs are hourly occurrences; many arrests have been made. On Jan. 19 six boats operated by scabs were scuttled. Finding the forces of capital and the colonial administration pitted against them, the strikers resorted to sabotage as a weapon of struggle.
The great number of strikes that have swept the Caribbean area since the outbreak of the Cuban revolution 18 months ago, indicates the increasing radicalization and organization of these toilers in Wall Street’s colonial domain. The United Fruit Company’s banana workers in Costa Rica and Colombia has been active and at the present moment, which is the period of the sugar harvest, the sugar workers of Cuba, Mexico and Veracruz are striking hard blows against their exploiters. The major weakness of the movements is the lack of coordination between labor in these countries.
Greater unity of action between the workers of the various countries is essential for victory.
 




The Road to Power ...
In the current issue of the New Leader appears an article by the Menshevik, Abramowitsch, on Socialism on the Road to Power. Here reformist socialism once more lifts its head and tries to create the impression that it may revive and come to life. Two currents in the rapidly moving world scene create the illusion among those like Abramowitsch, cast on the rubbish heap of history, that it is yet possible for them to come into their own. The first is the assumption of office in the so-called “democratic” countries by labor parties. Thus “labor” governments have come into power in the three Scandinavian countries; the labor party enters the national concentration government in Belgium; and finally in England events foreshadow a new Labor Party government. True, says Abramowitsch, the governments do not have a majority in parliament and hence “do not place before themselves the task of immediate realization of Socialism.” Their immediate task is to supply “correctives” for capitalism. Such reforms can no longer be carried out by capitalism itself. The job of salvaging capitalism must be performed by the proletariat “through the instrumentalities of its own parties” and it is in this sense that these parties must take “power”; that is, take over responsibility for the bourgeois government and the bourgeois, not the Socialist, system of society!
* * *

The Betrayals ...
Abramowitsch knows quite well the specific weight of the Scandinavian countries as against Germany. He recognizes in passing the “severe blow” dealt to international Socialism by the victory of Hitler. But he dare not stop to analyze the lessons of that blow, nor to apportion the responsibility for the frightful defeat of the German workers organized in the strongest Social Democratic party in the world. He is consoled by the misery to which the masses have been driven by the crisis. “The crisis now shaking the edifice of capitalism to its very foundation, emphasizing more clearly than ever the bankruptcy of capitalism, has compensated to a considerable degree the defeat suffered by Socialism in Central Europe.” The reformist and parliamentary cretins, misleading the workers and preventing their taking power, thereby forcing them to undergo the wretchedness and suffering of a decaying capitalist system, feel compensated [by] this very misery! And when the Abramowitsches see signs of a recrudescence of the class struggle, they propose to play the game once more as in Germany, as though Hitler did not exist, as though the working class had learned nothing from its experience. “This process of recovery is taking place in countries where democracy is firmly in power, and on a platform of reformism and coalition with democratic-bourgeois parties.” In short, he approves of the very process which creates illusions among the workers, which lulls them into passivity and disarms them at the very moment when fascism is making its bid for power (and not with votes!) in every country in Europe. The approaching imperialist war threatens the workers and all their democratic rights, gained through years of struggle and at untold sacrifice. Abramowitsch gives lip service to the fact that only the forces of Socialism can prevent war. And then this social chauvinist adds, in preparation for the actuality: “And only the working class, as the basic power upon which modern industry rests, can help win a war should it be impossible to avert it. Thus do the reformists guarantee their next betrayal in advance, guarantee national defense to uphold the capitalist system.
* * *

Abramovitsch ...
The second current that gives courage to the Mensheviks is the trend of the Stalinist bureaucracy in the Soviet Union. The complete swing to the right, the concessions made to the peasants, the blow dealt to the real Marxists have gained the applause of the Mensheviks. Abramowitsch encourages this trend and wants to see it go even further. After stating that the problem of power in Russia has not been solved, despite appearances, he asks for more concessions and greater steps to the right. “The democratization of the Soviet regime, conciliation (through compromise based upon abandonment of Utopianism) with the basic forces of the peasantry (read kulaks) and the proletariat (read the upper strata) is the immediate task in the problem of the ‘road to power’ in Russia.” A reconciliation with the Mensheviks is guardedly proposed. This would strengthen “the revolutionary government” as well as the Socialist proletariat of Europe. The whole tenor of the remarks on the Soviet Union is to soften the struggle against Stalin, to ask further moves to the right from the bureaucracy, and on this basis to promise to “defend the Soviet Union.” Such defense of the Soviet Union as would be made by the Mensheviks would mean the end of the Soviets. The founders of the Soviets, Lenin and Trotsky, were convinced that the October Revolution would not survive without the support of a proletarian revolution in the West. Stalinism is the living proof of the degeneration of the October Revolution, its downsliding, without that support. The failure to give that support, the defeat of the proletarian revolution in the West, can be laid at the door of the reformist socialists. By continuing their historic role, they propose to end the last vestiges of October. It still remains true that only a revolution in one of the advanced countries can save the October Soviet Revolution. But that is the task, not of the Second or the Third, but of the Fourth International.
 




Franco-Soviet Pact ...
Why was it necessary for the Soviet Union, according to the lackeys of Stalin, to enter into the mutual assistance pact with French imperialism? The Stalinists would have us believe that history began yesterday; that is, with the advent of Hitler to power in Germany. German fascism is the main enemy of the October Revolution. It is preparing, with the aid of Japan and Poland, an imperialist war of intervention. To put obstacles in the way of Hitler and thereby maintain world peace, it was necessary for Soviet diplomacy to make use of the contradictions in the camp of capitalism; namely, the antagonism between French and German imperialism. These “tactics” are falsely compared – after eighteen years of Soviet power – with the tactics of Lenin in the course of the civil war when Soviet Russia was ringed around by white guard armies and imperialist troops.
But history does not begin with Hitler. German fascism came to power with the “permission” of the Stalinist Comintern. It came to power by the defeat of the German workers, due directly to the betrayal of the German and the world proletariat by the Stalinists. Stalinism is capable of resorting to the worst features of capitalist diplomacy, but was and is incapable of practicing revolutionary politics, the essence of which is to utilize the contradictions, not only as between capitalist enemies, but the far deeper ones that exist at all times, and particularly in the epoch of the decline of capitalism, between the classes.
 

Stalinist Wreckage ...
The passage of power from the Leninists in the Soviet Union to the Stalinists, took place over the bridge of “socialism in one country.” It was over this bridge also that the October Revolution passed from its period of upswing accompanied by the world-wide strengthening of the proletariat, to the period of decline and defeats under the “savior” Stalin. The Third International turned its back on world revolution while the Soviets engaged in building socialism in one country. The October Revolution lost the offensive while Stalin resorted to the theory of “pure defense” in order to protect the gains of the five year plans.
The German Revolution was felt to be a threat to peace, the peace necessary then to “build socialism in one country.” Hence the Stalinists gave no guidance to the German workers; hence they failed to use the class contradictions within Germany, refused to enter into the “counter revolutionary” united front with the social democracy, and “permitted” fascism to come to power as the easier course, the course of lesser evil. Thus Stalinism, itself a major cause of the German debacle, is historically the cause of the “necessity” for signing the pact with France.
But the fever of the anti-united front days in Germany now gives way to the chills of the “popular front” and the “sacred union” in France. Both the fever and the chills are manifestations of the same disease, that cancer that saps the strength of the October Revolution – Stalinism. The Bolshevik-Leninists clearly predicted in advance that if Stalinism persisted in its course in Germany, then Hitler would come to power and become the worst threat to the very existence of the Soviet Union. And now again the Bolshevik-Leninists warn that if the French proletariat are misled into following the betraying course laid out by Stalin in France, fascism will again be victorious there too.
In Germany the Comintern refused to enter into a united front with the socialists, then known as social-fascists. But in France Stalinism enters into a “popular front” not only with the socialists but with the bourgeoisie itself. As the guarantee of French imperialism for its pact, the Stalinists will tie the workers to their bourgeoisie, will bring about the “sacred union” of civil peace, will aid in the building up of French militarism, will advocate that the proletariat aid its own bourgeoisie if that bourgeoisie is the ally of Stalin. Stalinism pursues the policy of the lesser evil for the preservation of French bourgeois democracy, hoping thereby to keep fascism from power. This is the road best calculated to lead the proletariat to bloody defeat. For the sake of maintaining the power of the bureaucratic Bonapartist regime in Russia, a diseased growth on the Soviet system, Stalin would sacrifice once more the interests of the world proletariat.
 

Rules of Class War ...
The rules of class war are in many senses analogous with those of war in general. The enemy of the working class is the bourgeoisie at home and abroad. The war should at all times be waged against the enemy. In war no enemy is ever defeated by pursuing a course of “pure defense.” The Stalinists would pursue that strategy in defending the Soviet Union; that is, the first stage of the dictatorship of the proletariat. The tactics in France and in connection with the Franco-Soviet pact are not in disagreement but in complete accord with the larger and completely false strategy of the Soviet bureaucracy.
If the workers are to capture and maintain power, then they must pursue the Marxist strategy of world revolution, that of turning the defense at the proper moment into an assault on all the positions of capitalism. Today the decisive field of battle is France. The working class of the entire world must rally to the aid of the French workers and help them arm for the final struggle against French imperialism. That will be the best defense of the U.S.S.R., a defense which cannot be entrusted to the Stalinist betrayers.
 




In Belgium ...
Social Democracy again proves its role as a brake on the working class in its struggle against capitalism. With the existence of a Marxist party in Belgium, the political crisis through which that country has been passing could have been utilized to direct the proletariat in militant struggle for the purpose of achieving as a first step a workers’ government. But a revolutionary party did not exist there, owing in largest measure to the criminal blunders and betrayals of Stalinism. Social Democracy retains its power over the trade unions and in the political activities of the masses. But within the ranks of the socialist Labor Party of Belgium, the most advanced workers, absorbing some of the bitter lessons of the German defeat, have been slowly moving to the left. The deep-going crisis of capitalism produced the objective conditions for the rapid growth of such a left wing, but its leadership could only accommodate itself to the pressure of the reformist leaders at the right and thus held back the workers instead of arousing them to militant action.
 

Coalition Gov’t ...
In Belgium, as in France, fascism is a growing menace to the working class. The Belgian king is in close touch with the forces of reaction and the monarchy will be utilized without a doubt in the attempt to save the capitalist system by handing the power to the extreme reactionaries who will crush all workers’ organizations unless the workers seize the power and liquidate the monarchy at the same time. Far from preparing the masses for this revolutionary task, the Social Democracy is rendering them passive. Instead of breaking with the bourgeoisie as the first step in the defense of the workers against fascism, the betraying leaders of the Labor Party have joined in the coalition ministry. The militant workers have demanded straight along that in the political crisis accompanying the economic one, the Labor Party take over the government alone. But there is nothing that socialist leaders fear so much as power, for then they cannot reject the basic demands of the working class without standing naked and exposed. The entry of Vandervelde, De Man and the “leftist” Spaak into the Van Zeeland coalition shows once more how reformism creates illusions among the workers by denouncing capitalism loudly in words in order the better to save the capitalist (“democratic”) system in deeds. Vandervelde requires the bourgeoisie in the coalition so as to avoid complete exposure when he tramples on the needs of the masses.
* * *

The Effects ...
It is clear from the circumstances surrounding the formation of the coalition ministry that the socialist workers, the rank and file, were opposed to this betrayal and to class collaboration at this juncture. For the entry was in the nature of a coup d’etat, an accomplished fact, put over not merely on the Labor Party, but on the Central Committee of the party as well. This throws the clearest light possible on the attitude of these misleaders towards “legality.” They would have the workers follow the course permitted to them by finance capital in the struggle to overthrow the bourgeoisie, but they reserve to themselves the right to act “illegally” for the benefit of the bourgeoisie in the ranks of the working class. This act on the part of the reactionaries will have wide repercussions. The desertion of the left wing by its leader Spaak, who also joined the ministry (his reward for this foul treachery), prevented an immediate split, since the left forces in the Labor Party were thrown into confusion. Nevertheless the left wing continued its publication of Action Socialiste and denounced the coalition government, stating: “We again reaffirm our belief in the revolutionary road to Socialism. Coalition is disastrous.” The situation in the Labor Party at present is a real test of the leftist forces and may result in rapid progress to a real Marxist basis. Thus a deputy from Brussels declared in the Special Congress called to “ratify” the fait accompli:
“I am convinced now more than ever that with these methods (compromise) capitalism will never be conquered. We have behind us bitter events – Germany, Austria – isn’t that sufficient that we should learn? We must have more confidence in the power of the working class – in our own strength – the time will come when our voice will be heard – the voice of Revolutionary Socialism.”
The struggle against coalition will tend to unite the left centrist forces and aid them to reach the advanced workers. This also involves the struggle against De Man for putting into effect his entire “Labor Plan” which would involve the taking of power by a workers’ government, and not merely portions of it, as De Man now proposes. In this fight the Bolsheviks must come to the aid of the revolutionary workers in the Labor Party. In the course of common struggle the Bolsheviks can win over these forces for a real militant struggle against fascism and for workers’ power.
 




Imperial Jubilee ...
If one can overcome the natural feeling of nausea on reading the press accounts of the celebration of twenty-five years of parasitism of King George, there are valuable political lessons to be learned from such circuses. The British monarchy is part of that vast paraphernalia of English imperialism for hypnotizing the working class. Without such hypnotism, the proletariat would see through their own eyes and not through those provided for them by the capitalist ruling class. The creation of illusions is the function of a vast apparatus supported by the bourgeoisie : the bourgeois press, the schools, the church, the radio – and the monarchy. With the aid of these weapons British imperialism gives the impression to the worker that he is part of a common civilization, that he has a common fatherland, that there are higher things in life than material class interests and the class struggle. By means, further, of bourgeois democracy completely controlled and manipulated by the rulers, the worker is hypnotized into believing that he actually has a share in willing his own slavery and exploitation.
 

Role of Monarchy ...
The bourgeoisie foster carefully the illusion that the King is a mere figurehead, that he reigns but does not rule. So long as the proletariat remains acquiescent to bourgeois rule, so long as there is no threat to the power of the capitalist class, the monarchy remains seemingly a mere feudal tradition, quite harmless within the framework of bourgeois democracy. In reality the ruling class is far-sighted and in conducting the defense of its power against the possible attacks of the working class the capitalists resort to military strategy: they build in advance second and third line trenches to which to retreat in case the first line is taken. Thus if the workers begin to see through the heavy veils cast over reality by the propagandists of wage slavery, if they begin to utilize bourgeois democracy to change the system, then there is always the House of Lords upon which to fall back. If that is not enough, then there is finally the monarchy which can be made in the “national emergency” to assume, by the “divine right of capitalism,” the prerogatives of outright, reactionary dictatorship. Under capitalism, in short, the King exists as a last resort for the defeat of the proletarian revolution. It is for that reason, to have a social “stabilizer,” that the tradition of monarchy is maintained. Thus every so often the monarchical shield is exposed to published view, it is furbished and polished so as to perform resplendently its hypnotic function. But behind this shield can be clearly discerned the cold and calculating cruelty of the bourgeoisie!
 

Labor Party ...
It is not only the direct instruments of capitalist power that serve to create illusions among the workers. It is also the reformist labor leaders who foster the viciously false idea that the King stands not for the ruling class but for the nation. Instead of teaching that the King may at the proper time become all the elements of state force and coercion epitomized and summed up, MacDonald and those of his ilk still in the Labor Party offer their allegiance to the King as the representative (chosen by whom?) of the “entire nation.” The belly-crawling sycophancy of these reformist betrayers can arouse only the utmost disgust and loathing of the working class. The bourgeoisie will not let this occasion, a celebration of their preservation as a ruling class in Europe, pass without taking full advantage of the “wave of patriotism” evoked in the middle classes to force a general election on the patriotism and rearmament issues. The Jubilee will be utilized to prepare for war. Part of the preparation for war is the establishment of a conservative government. Recent political signs in England have pointed to the “danger” of a new labor government coming into power In the next general election. With the help of MacDonald the bourgeoisie will do everything in their power to prevent such a “catastrophe. The capitalists may not fear the present labor leaders; but they know that back of these false leaders stand the working masses, demanding decisive steps towards socialism. Let the masses once learn to the end the lesson that reformism is nothing but a form of betrayal, and they will quickly change their leaders for revolutionists who can lead them to victory and who can show them how to defeat fascism that grows more and more as a threat to the workers.
 




Who Will Disarm the Fascists?
Nothing paralyzes the revolutionary activity of the advanced workers in any country so much as sabotage and treachery from within its own ranks. French social democracy and Stalinism are both engaged in creating and fostering the most harmful illusions in the ranks of the French proletariat. The success of their treachery can lead only to the victory of fascism. On a par with the social patriotic support of French militarism and imperialism, under the guise of “defense of the Soviet Union,” by the support of the Franco-Soviet military alliance, is the sowing of the illusion by the “Popular Front” that the capitalist government can be made to disarm the fascist bands hired by finance capital. As a quid pro quo for their support of a “democratic” government, the Stalinists have been demanding that the government agree to disarm the fascists. Laval now “yields” to this so-called pressure from the “left” (as the capitalist press puts it) and announces that the Mobile Guards or special police are to be reenforced and given the immediate task of disarming the Croix de Feu and other private armies. No doubt the cretins who trust in the imperialist government which is ceaselessly preparing for war, to preserve peace, will hail this “decision” of Laval as a victory. In reality the workers should be aroused to the fraud that will be perpetrated by Laval to assist the fascists and strike a blow at the revolutionary vanguard of the proletariat. For under his fake promise, Laval will proceed to take strong measures against the armed workers, against the incipient workers’ militia organized to defend the proletariat from fascist attack. The Laval government corresponds in its functions with that of Giolitto-Bonomi in Italy and Bruening-Schleicher-von Papen in Germany. It is the transition form between democracy and fascism. In this transition the fascist bands are created by finance capital and aided and strengthened by the support of the police and the army. With the direct connivance of leaders in the “democratic” government, of course.
* * *

The Policy of Laval
Laval was placed in power by the financial oligarchy in complete control of the Bank of France. This capstone of French imperialism ousted Flandin when he refused to obey the dictates of the bankers – the Rothschild interests, the de Wendels, etc. – in the matter of deflation. Laval was placed in power because he was the willing tool of the big bankers in the carrying out of an economic policy which – by decree – unloads the entire crisis on the backs of the workers, the small functionaries and the exploited peasants. The same de Wendel who heads the armaments trust and heavy industry (Comité des Forges), who directly finances de la Rocque, the would-be Hitler of France, entrusted the reins of the bourgeois government to Laval. Will any worker take seriously the word of Laval that he will act to disarm the bands created and supported by the same master whose orders are law to Laval – and are in actuality translated into laws by decree?
But perhaps it is not Laval who will really disarm the fascists, but a better friend of the workers, Herriot for example. Or better still one who advocates the People’s Front like Daladier. The Stalinists, for the sake of Soviet diplomacy, perverted the united front with the French Socialists into a crass form of class collaboration for the preservation of bourgeois democracy. The united front became the social-patriotic People’s Front with the inclusion of the directly bourgeois Radical Socialist Party of Herriot and Daladier. We are witnessing the ripening of the fruit of this People’s Front. The Stalinists and Socialists make all possible concessions to the petty bourgeois Radicals, including a complete reliance on parliamentarism. The Radical Socialists, in turn, give support to the direct representatives of big business, to Laval. Herriot prevented a split in the Radical Socialist congress that has just been concluded over the question of supporting the government by decree of Laval. Daladier conducted an apparent fight for the People’s Front against such support but was “persuaded” to yield to the patriotic Herriot. Daladier does not want to split his party. Thus the entire course of the Stalinists is clearly revealed as playing into the hands of the imperialists. The further end of the chain of class collaboration in which the working class links are forged by the Socialist and Stalinist betrayers, rests firmly in the grip of the de Wendels.
The workers must learn that this is the inevitable result of a course of class collaboration, that they remain completely at the mercy of the big bankers. Only by pursuing a clear-cut revolutionary policy of the working class can the workers attain their own ends. Not the direct representatives of the bourgeoisie, but the armed forces of the workers can disarm the fascists. The answer to Laval’s fraud must be the more rapid arming of the workers and the building of the workers’ militia.
 




Miners’ Strike in England
The threat of a general strike of the English miners attracts the immediate attention of the class-conscious workers everywhere. For they remember the last great struggle which paralyzed British imperialism. That struggle, on the widest scale ever experienced in England, came as a defensive stand against the reactionary drive of the entire bourgeoisie to lower production costs so as to meet competition by a relentless lowering of wages. The strike developed into a general strike involving the railroad, transport and mining industries, under the “leadership” of the General Council of the Trade Unions. The Triple Alliance was betrayed by the General Council whose leaders were given the prestige of Stalinist endorsement through the abortive Anglo-Russian Committee (committee of trade union centers of both countries – Ed.). In the present instance, a vote has already given authorization to the miners’ executives to call a strike if necessary in order to obtain an increase of fifty cents a day. The strike would come at a time when a considerable recovery of business and of industrial production has taken place. This means that the miners are taking the offensive to regain the ground so heavily lost during the years of crisis.
* * *

England and the Far East
The imminence of a further advance by Japan into North China has aroused the keenest apprehension among English capitalists. With the British fleet tied up in the Mediterranean due to Mussolini’s war, the British are helpless to offer much resistance to Japanese penetration in the Far East. The vast investments of British imperialism in China are seriously endangered. Just as the United States was forced to recognize the Soviet Union in order to make the Japanese militarists pause temporarily, so now England is forced to turn to the Soviet Union with an eye to alliance in the common struggle (from totally different standpoints) against Japan. Although this is not the only factor involved, it is nevertheless a major cause of the recently opened negotiations between Russia and England in regard to a large loan to be floated for the Soviet Union by the English banks. Part of the interest on the loan would go to the purchase of railroad equipment in England. Japan cannot help understanding the meaning of this move. It is possible that the “timely” publication of the facts concerning the loan, accomplished its purpose of halting the immediate steps by the Japanese army for engineering an autonomous North China. Whether the Japanese will feel this mood of caution for any length of time remains to be seen. The contradictions that antagonize Japanese and British imperialism have reached the point where the traditional friendship resulting from the military alliance that existed up to 1922, begins to turn sour and to give way to hatred.
* * *

Class Struggle in France
The situation in France becomes more threatening to the workers daily. The battle between the Fascist Croix de Feu and the Socialist and Communist workers at Limoges, in which fifteen workers were seriously injured and none of the Fascists, is a lesson from the life of the need for an armed workers’ militia to meet the armed Fascist bands. The policy of the “People’s Front” becomes in this respect a worse and worse betrayal of the interests of the proletariat. It is the medium through which the workers are lulled into passivity, through which working class policies are made dependent on and subordinate to the bourgeoisie. The workers are being misled into relying on the “liberal” and “radical” bourgeoisie whose interests can only be identical with those of the finance-capitalists. The only salvation for the French workers and toilers is the leadership of a Bolshevik party based on a revolutionary program aiming at seizing the power for the working class. In the coming period it is either Fascism or communism that will triumph. The vicious policy of the People’s Front can only assure the victory of the Fascists, helped into power by the Herriots and Daladiers – and the Blums and Cachins.
* * *

Trade Treaty with Canada
Whose government is it? Roosevelt’s treaty with Canada would almost by itself prove that the government follows the demands and the interests of big business, of industrial and commercial capital as against the interests of the farmer. Industry thrives at the expense of the agricultural sector of the capitalist system. The Treaty is indeed “cold comfort to the farmer” whose interests are sacrificed wherever necessary to those of the factory owners. In the main it is the manufacturers of autos, machinery and farm implements, including tractors, who are helped, while the American farmer is forced to meet added competition from Canadian farmers. Our main interest is not particularly in the farmer-capitalist. But the working class will have to learn ultimately to utilize the contradictions that exist in American economy, – and one of these contradictions is illustrated in the Canadian Treaty, namely, that tariffs are for the benefit of the financiers and industrial capitalists, not for that of the farmer. His interests come second, if at all.
 




Scottsboro Case
Once more the Scottsboro boys are to face capitalist legal-lynch law of the South. This time just to satisfy those old fogies of the Supreme Court the farce has been enacted of placing one Negro on the grand jury rolls. Nobody has any illusions at all that this means a change in attitude towards the Negro or his “rights.” On the contrary, the press treats the matter with utter cynicism, pointing out that of course no Negro will actually be allowed to serve on trial juries. The cynical gesture has exactly the same meaning as that of Hitler in inviting two Jews to participate in the Olympics. Nobody is taken in by the farce, but it permits the reactionaries to gloss over the realities and to state that the formal rules of the game have been satisfied. The ruling class would like nothing better than to have the Negro boys quietly convicted without too much public fuss. This the class-conscious workers will never permit. Mass pressure must be aroused once again to snatch these boys out of the hands of the lynchers and to ward oft this act of terrorism against the oppressed Negroes of the U.S.
 

Egypt ...
One of the reasons for British opposition to the Italian invasion of Ethiopia was the dread, that the sympathies of every colonial people would be actively aroused and might take channels of revolt against the immediate oppressor. The fear of the English ruling class has already been justified by the events in Egypt. All that was required to set off the spark was the speech of Hoare, British Foreign Minister, giving clear evidence that the rulers of Egypt did not intend to carry out a previous promise to grant a new constitution. The first constitution of 1923 had been replaced by a new one in 1930. The latter had been abrogated in 1934 when the Wafdist movement became a threat to British rule. The reactionary speech of Hoare started, student demonstrations and riots that were put down ruthlessly by troops. This is the beginning of a revived movement for independence in Egypt, one of the fruits of the Italian attack on Ethiopia. It would not require much to cause the spread, of this movement for national liberation to the other colonies of Great Britain, particularly India. A widespread concerted movement of revolt of the colonial countries would be a blow not only at British imperialism but at all imperialism.
 

Shanghai ...
An open anti-Japanese movement sprang up in Shanghai this week. The threat of the Japanese to take over the five northern provinces produced a feeling of desperation and the demand for a war against the invaders. The situation in Shanghai resulting from this agitation and some demonstrations against the Japanese, became so tense that the population of Chapel, mindful of the previous brutality and slaughter in this district, flocked into the International Settlement by the tens and scores of thousands. The hared and mistrust of the Japanese brigands is too great for the Chinese masses to believe the words of “reassurance” issued by the Japanese army representatives that no bombardment or invasion was intended. The Nippon imperialists have been laying the basis for some time for large scale operations designed to meet any resistance that might ensue when the seizure of the northern provinces was consummated.
 




Battle of the Currencies
Nothing illustrates so well the fact that capitalist production and consumption rest not on national but on world foundations than does the world-wide battle of currencies. The world is divided into well-defined areas politically and economically under the control of one or the other of the great capitalist powers. The signposts over these areas denoting such control are the pound, the dollar and the franc respectively. The Japanese would like to establish the yen in a similar manner as a token of world dominion, it is this battle of the currencies, each symptom of the gigantic struggle underneath for outright colonial control, that is being witnessed at the moment in China. Control of Chinese currency and Chinese foreign exchange would go a long ways in aiding one or the other of the imperialists to control a larger share of Chinese foreign trade. One of the infamous twenty-one demands made on China by Japan was that the Japanese be given control over the chaotic Chinese currency, and that Japan be allowed to set up a gold backing for Chinese currency in the Bank of Japan at Tokyo. Leith-Ross, agent of British imperialism, is now engaged in the effort to tie the Chinese silver currency to the pound sterling. He would do this partly through the aid of an “international loan” to Chiang Kai-Shek. Japan has already signified her intransigent opposition to this scheme. The United States has played no small part in bringing about the present situation.
* * *

American Silver Policy
The policy of increasing the price of, silver pursued by the Roosevelt administration had, among other things, the aim of counteracting the gains made by Japan in Chinese trade due to depreciation of the yen. Japanese goods became cheaper for China as for the rest of the world, since Japanese prices did not rise much and other currencies could therefore secure more in goods in Japan. American gold policy – depreciating the dollar in terms of gold – did not affect the Far East greatly because there silver rather than gold was the basis of currency and money. Hence Roosevelt hoped to secure a greater share of Chinese trade by depreciating the dollar in terms of silver. Since the silver would pour out of the Chinese hoards to secure the profit offered in terms of the American dollar it was hoped that the silver would be exchanged for American goods. This policy has been only partially successful in restoring American trade. Meantime silver has been smuggled out of China at a tremendous rate despite the attempt to prevent this by means of an equalization export duty. The rise in prices of Chinese goods has now reached the point where inflation threatens. The result of American policy has been to lower the standard of living of the Chinese masses even beyond the starvation level already existing, something that does not concern in the least American capitalism in its mad search for profits.
Now the Chinese government has finally taken the step, under the advice and encouragement of English imperialism, of going off the silver standard. This step is in line with the policies of capitalist nations all over the world of establishing managed (manipulated) currencies to protect the interests of the home bourgeoisie. It is not taken, needless to say, to restore a stable currency that would be for the benefit of the Chinese masses. They do not enter into consideration at all. Besides being concerned over their share of trade, the British are also looking out for their vast investments that are threatened by the instability of Chinese money and the strong possibilities of inflation. China is now the battleground of the nations and the battle is for the moment confined to money. But the fight for control of Chinese money is only part of the conflict to seize and subjugate China as a colony. At any moment the diplomatic and economic conflict threatens to turn to other means, the use of bullets instead of coin. The intervention of America and England in the monetary sphere is only notice given to Japan that her seizure of Chinese territory will sooner or later have to meet the test of force on the international arena. The big powers, England in particular, are giving notice to Japan that not all their attention is devoted to the Ethiopian situation, that they are giving close attention to events in the Far East as well.
That the Japanese will nevertheless apply pressure on the corrupt Chinese government to prevent China becoming a sterling area goes without saying. The Japanese army will intervene, first by threats, then by further action to strangle China. How far they will go depends also on the international “balance of power,” on the combinations among the imperialists. As one power moves to gain more control at the expense of the others, the latter combine against the immediate menace, only to fall apart again the moment a new situation arises. The basic law of capitalism at all times, but particularly in the period of decay, is the law of its instability.
 




Fascist Symptoms in the Third Party Movement
The present mayoralty campaign in Chicago gives symptomatic indications of the coming struggle to win the middle classes and the unemployed for the purpose of reaction. In this campaign the third party movement put forward its candidate, Jenkins, formerly a “progressive” republican associated with LaFollette. In his speeches Jenkins proceeded to lay the foundations (as does Father Coughlin) for that appeal to anti-Semitism which is the inevitable accompaniment of the rise of fascism. He denounced as those responsible for the notorious corruption in Chicago “a pack of crooked Jews who have disgraced our city.” It develops that Jenkins has Nazi ties and that Pelley of Silver Shirt fame visited the Chicago Friends of New Germany to secure their support for Jenkins. Thus we find already on a local scale how the Third Party movement under present historic conditional plays a reactionary role and tends to assume fascist forms.
Nor is this observation based on the leaning of the movement towards anti-Semitism. The entire program attempts to translate into American terms the early demagogy of fascism in its first strivings for a political foothold. Thus the booklet issued by this party calls for an organization whose members will be subjected to “a stern program of physical education.” This is unprecedented in American politics and is a clear hint of the ultimate goal of creating storm troops and fascist bands.
Furthermore “the new party must be intensely nationalistic,” It takes no clairvoyant to read into this phrase the entire program of American imperialism and the irreconcilable struggle between such a party and the organizations of the militant and revolutionary workers. The program calls for a new party for American business, agriculture and labor. It makes the following demagogic bid for the unemployed worker’s support: “Business and labor and government have all failed the jobless American.” “He is entitled to work and the new party will give him work and do it at once.” Plainly there is here the attempt to pit the unemployed against the employed workers.
The new party reaches out for the petty bourgeoisie, overburdened by taxation. It is proposed to make the United States a “taxless nation” by using the profits from transportation, light and power, telephones, telegraphs, radio and similar (monopolized) public services to defray the cost of government. Here is the usual demagogic appeal to the small man against the trusts. Inflation is promised to the farmer in order to liquidate the
entire public debt by the systematic issuance of government currency over several years’ time “without disturbing the financial structure of the country”. Without exhausting the chimerical outpourings of the capitalist horn of plenty pictured by third party demagogy, we may add that the soldiers have not been forgotten (they will be given the bonus), nor the youth who will be “given the opportunity or better be required to serve the country in some capacity for a short period of time.” Naturally the fascists would be in favor of forced labor for the young or of universal conscription.
* * *

New Political Movements and the Class Struggle
To the Marxist it is quite clear that no new political movement arises without meeting urgent needs of one or the other of the two main classes in modern society. The working class is slowly coming to a realization through all its everyday experiences that strive with might and main as it may it cannot regain the former standards of living. Workers in one industry or the other may gain temporary success in bettering the conditions under which they gain their livelihood, but taking the class as a whole capitalism has exhausted its possibilities of granting to workers any real concessions in the way of wages or higher standards. The waves of strike struggles, each more militant than the last, end with the proletariat still suffering the same poverty, the same misery, the same intense exploitation as before. The lesson is being gradually driven home that the only way out is the revolutionary way, through the overthrow of capitalism. Hence the need for the Workers Party to give guidance to the class.
But in parallel fashion, the big bourgeoisie, in their greedy scramble to maintain profits against the desperate rivalry of the capitalists of other nations, find the apparent solution for their problems by withdrawing all the previous concessions forced from them by the workers, and by an intensive drive on the living standards of the proletariat and the toilers in general.
This gigantic struggle, assuming a myriad of forms, is reflected politically. To accomplish their purposes financiers subsidize new movements which rally the middle class under the banner of reaction for the purpose of eliminating democracy and preventing the workers from seizing the power. The third party movement must inevitably reflect this need of the big bourgeoisie under present conditions. The answer by the workers can be given not through a labor party but by means of the only force of defeating fascism, the revolutionary Marxist party, the Workers Party.
 




The Class Struggle in France
The lull in the storm that occurred in France with the advent of the Flandin government, gives every indication of coming to a close. Flandin himself stated, on taking office as premier, that his government would be the last “experiment” in bourgeois democracy. That experiment, as could have been predicted in view of the general crisis that struck France only little more than a year ago, and in view of the international political situation with its threat of world war at any moment,”has proved a recognised failure. More and more clearly the question is posed in France: the salvation of bankrupt capitalism through the setting up of a violent and brutal fascist dictatorship, or the seizure of power by the proletariat for the establishing of the communist society.
With the aid of big finance capital, the fascist forces have been closing their ranks in preparation for the coming coup d’état directed towards the overthrow of the Third French Republic and with the aim of savage repression of the organizations of the working class. Colonel la Rocque, head of the War Veterans organized in the Croix de Feu, has become the recognized leader of the reaction. Already he has a large private armed force” said to number three hundred thousand”ready to do his bidding. As in the other countries where fascism has arisen and achieved power, la Rocque is aided by the upper bureaucratic strata of the army. Pistols, rifles and ammunition “disappear” from the armories”for the use of the fascist armed bands. Thus the French press stated recently that the annual inventory of the Versailles armory had shown the disappearance of 336,400 rifle cartridges and 155,000 revolver bullets. If French tradition is any criterion, then the fascists are preparing for a military dictatorship to be set up by a sudden blow.
* * *

The Ranks of the Workers
The danger to the working class is rendered all the more acute, as the Marxist knows, by the lack of a revolutionary party in France at this critical juncture. In place of such a Marxist party, serving as the vanguard and the rallying force for the inevitable struggle, there exist two centrist parties led by reactionary bureaucracies. The pressure from their rank and file membership and from the masses forced these bureaucracies to enter into a united front against fascism. But the Stalinists and the Socialists have both hamstrung this united front by their policies of turning it to the service of bourgeois democracy at the very time when this democracy is about to crumble. Only the Bolshevik-Leninist fraction of the SF.I.O. (the S.P. of France) has advocated a clear-cut revolutionary program to lead the workers along the road to power. This fraction has gradually become a force in the left wing of the S.F.I.O. and has won over to its views a large section of the revolutionary workers in the Federation of the Seine, both youth and adult. The progressive nature of the entry of this fraction into the ranks of the S.F.I.O. is about to be tested in the forthcoming national convention of the Socialist Party.
* * *

Role of the Bolshevik-Leninists
At this Congress the Bolshevik-Leninists will present their program in the form of resolutions. They will review and sum up the history of betrayal of the Second and Third Internationals that brought about the victory of fascism in Germany, Austria, etc. instead of the ushering in of Communism, and they will therefore call for the formation of the Fourth International to lead the workers to victory. They will demand a complete break with the bourgeoisie, with the “truce government of sacred onion” and instead of this policy of the lesser evil of supporting bourgeois democracy against fascism, a policy that can only lead aa in Germany to the defeat of the proletariat, the Bolshevik-Leninists will propose the taking of power by the united front in the form of the Workers and Peasants’ Government. Coming at this critical period in France, the Congress of the S.F.I.O. may prove momentous, not because of any possibility of reform of the S.P., but rather because of the struggle that will develop between the rights and the lefts at this congress and the support given to the advocates of the Fourth International. If the question of organic unity between the S.P. and the C.P. is raised at this Congress, the Bolshevik-Leninists will expose completely the reactionary basis proposed for such unity by the Stalinist bureaucracy as well as by the leaders of the S.P. Such organic unity can only prove progressive if it is based on the complete Marxist program of the Bolshevik-Leninists. This program calls for the armed defense of the organizations of the working class against the attacks of the fascist bands, for the building of the workers’ militia, for a militant struggle of the armed workers to break up the fascist bands, for a united front policy to defend proletarian democracy, the broadest type of democracy, and not the fraudulent bourgeois democracy represented in bourgeois parliaments. To confine working class activity now in France to parliamentarism, is to doom the workers in advance to defeat by la Rocque and his bloody hordes. All power to the “Trotskyists” and their revolutionary program which offers the French workers the key to their situation!
 




The Stresa Conference
What happened at Stresa was a foregone conclusion long in advance of the actual conference. Hitler sweeps aside the armament clauses of the Versailles Treaty, establishes Germany’s complete freedom to prepare for the next war, and all that the former allies can do under present conditions is to admonish Hitler that he had better not do it again. This time, say the helpless premiers, we will yield to you – but next time, look out! Stresa thus marks the success of Nazi diplomacy in winning England to support German rearmament – for use against the Soviet Union. At the same time Great Britain makes It perfectly plain that the reparations clauses and the armament provisions of the Versailles system may be void – but the territorial changes made by the war stand. Hitler need not expect to recover from the British lion what has once come under its claws. If German capitalism needs to expand, let it be to the East!
If Stresa marks the final rumbling of the post-war Versailles system for guaranteeing to the victors the spoils, it signifies at the same time the weakening of French hegemony in Europe. French imperialism feels this keenly and hence seeks help to maintain her slipping position. France is aware that the German militarists fear nothing so much as a military alliance between France and the Soviet Union. Thus far this alliance, all but consummated, has been held as a threat over Hitler’s head. But having accomplished his first major objective, Hitler immediately proceeds towards the accomplishment of his next object, the separation of France from Russia. That is the meaning of the vague and formless offer to sign an Eastern Locarno pact without any military assistance clauses. That offer is intended to gain time and to head off the Franco-Russian alliance. In this move the Nazis have the fervent support of the reactionaries of both France and England. The Daily Express of Lord Beaverbrook ridicules the idea of defining an aggressor: “The truth about all the rigmarole from Stresa is that Locarno and all its works have been reduced by the new events to utter nonsense. Are we going to bomb Paris because France invades Germany to assist Russia which has been invaded by Germany? No, sir!” And in truth, who will ever stop on the outbreak of a war to determine the aggressor? Only self-interest determines the combinations made in an imperialist war.
* * *

Stalinism and the War Danger
To the working class it must be made clear that Stresa is a step not towards peace but towards war. Faced with the prospect of imperialist war and intervention against the Soviet Union, the Stalinists reveal the depths to which they have dragged the October Revolution.
Any appeal for revolutionary action of the international proletariat is completely ignored while the Stalinists confine their efforts for peace completely to the realm of diplomacy and maneuvers behind the scene. In their efforts to maintain their bureaucratic power in the Soviet Union, they sacrifice again and again the interests of the working class at home and abroad. By their own illusion that an “enduring” military alliance with imperialist France can stave of fascist intervention; by their willingness to defend the status quo, which means the upholding of capitalism in its bourgeois democratic form at the very time when this must give way in France (the present key to the international situation) either to fascism or to communism; the Stalinists corrupt the minds of the French workers with the same false views. They prepare the road to defense of the fatherland and to fascist victory by giving the French workers false, opportunist guidance instead of clear understanding and directives. Instead of utilizing the united front between themselves and the Socialists for involving the French workers in struggle against the Bonapartist Flandin government, which steadily paves the way for a fascist military coup d’etat, the Stalinist party actually extends the united front to the supporters of the Bonapartist regime and thereby places the workers at the service of the bourgeoisie.
The whole situation in France calls for energetic revolutionary leadership and for revolutionary activity, including the arming of the proletariat for the breaking up of fascist bands and for the preparation to seize power, – and the Stalinists proceed to denounce the real Marxists who see the situation in all its clarity and offer the only correct policy to the French proletariat as police agents. When historically the bourgeoisie has reached the end of its rope and can offer nothing but the profoundest misery to the workers, the Stalinists attempt to confine the activities of the united front to a struggle for immediate demands, for impossible concessions from the capitalists. Proposing a basis for organic unity to the Socialists that is in line with the bankrupt policies of the Comintern, the Stalinists would confine the struggle against the extension of conscription to two years of service and thus against the war preparations – to monster petitions! Instead of preparing the workers for a direct attack on the entire capitalist system, the Communist Party of France calls for a fight on high prices in order to lower them. In Germany the ultra-leftist course of Stalinism was a direct cause of the victory of Hitlerism. In France if the workers are misled into following the reactionary guidance of the Third International, then the ultra-opportunist course of the bureaucrats in the present juncture will prove the cause of the success of French fascism.
 


 THE FIRST international truce for the fixation of naval armaments among the imperialist powers at ratios corresponding to the relation of forces a decade ago, has come to its inevitable end. Theoretically Japan’s denunciation of the Washington Naval Pact of 1922 will dissolve the pact only in 1936; actually the preparations for the fierce, relentless race to win naval supremacy as the preliminary to the second world war, are already under way. The gigantic cartels operating on an international scale are compelled periodically to sign temporary agreements allocating the world’s markets for their mutual benefit. Just so are the national imperialist states forced to resort to diplomatic pacts which, at bottom, grant recognition of the existing division of the world into colonies and spheres of influence belonging to the various capitalist powers. And just as the competing trusts and combines cast aside their agreements the moment they feel that changed conditions permit a greater share of the world market to be wrested from their opponents by a renewal of open warfare; so the truce among the powers is broken the moment the opportunity presents itself to one or more of the imperialist robbers to seize new, undivided territory or to redivide the old at the expense of a weakening competitor. Thus the ending of the naval truce is an additional portent of the nearness of imperialist war.
The Washington “covenant” of 1922 was in reality a treaty that postponed the second world war that already threatened the moment the first had ceased. That war ended in defeat for Europe, victors and vanquished alike, and victory for America. German imperialism came out of the war completely bankrupt and crushed for a long time to come; but British finance capital likewise emerged so much weakened by the struggle that it could no longer maintain its position as sole master of the seas. The American colossus, taking advantage of the entire world situation during the war, had furthered its own exploiting interests at such high speed that it had been transformed in a few short years from a debtor nation still absorbing capital from abroad to develop its productive powers, to a domineering creditor with a total foreign investment almost equalling that of British imperialism. US capitalism had secured an iron grip on the world’s trade and it meant— indeed as a matter of life and death—to keep and to strengthen its hold. But in a robbers’ world in which the advanced capitalist nations ruthlessly exploit the weaker and more backward ones, the possibility of squeezing enormous profits out of the populations of the remotest corners of the earth depends in the last analysis not merely on capitalist technique but on military and naval strength to defend one’s conquests against other robbers. On this score American imperialism, under the leadership then of Wilson, had no illusions and had begun its preparations for the next war even before entering the first.
The first explicit notice that American imperialism was definitely embarked on a course leading to world hegemony, was given to the world by the “1916 program” proposed by Wilson and Daniels for the construction of “incomparably the best navy in the world”. This program contemplated the laying down of such super-dreadnoughts that all the other navies in the world would have been rendered immediately obsolete. In naval warfare—the determining factor in all modern wars being control of the sea lanes—the things that count are the size and range of the floating batteries, the speed of motion which enables the choice, of range of action, and the ability to stand punishment as incorporated in the thickness and arrangement of armor. The battleships planned by the naval arm of American imperialism in 1916 would have outclassed all existing ships in these respects. But before the appropriations already made by Congress could be expended, the US had entered the war and the 1916 program was temporarily shelved. Wilson was too well aware however that the income of the big American bankers was “scattered broadcast over the ocean” in ship bottoms to abandon his goal. Hence in 1919 his message to Congress just before sailing to the Paris Peace Conference stated: “I take it for granted that the Congress will carry out the naval program which was undertaken before we entered the war.” The 1919 program as outlined by Secretary Daniels stunned the world. In three years time the US was to lay down and to complete as much as possible ten super-dreadnoughts, six battle cruisers, ten scout cruisers and one hundred and thirty other ships. Nor was this to be the end, for a second three year program was in store after the first.
Under the reign of imperialism the armaments of any single capitalist power are either actually or potentially weapons aimed at all the others ... The two powers that felt most keenly the threat of US capitalism were naturally Japan and England. The latter was being challenged openly and directly for supremacy on the seas. Despite the fact that at the end of the war the British possessed a fleet far greater than the fleets of all the rest of the world combined, their navy was far too costly to be maintained during peace by a nation on the verge of bankruptcy. And besides the new American battleships would render powerless by their size, speed and concentration of fire, the largest fighting ships in the English fleet. Japan knew that the new fleet was intended to solve the first immediate and primary problem of American imperialism: mastery of the Pacific for the exploitation of the vast Chinese market and the control of Asia. The world has moved since prewar days, but all that has changed within the ring of capitalist powers are the major rivals in the coming war and the main scene of battle. The technique and the productive powers of American capitalism are the most advanced in the world, but to use to full advantage its mighty forces, fettered by the national boundaries and by the present division of world markets, it is pushed inevitably towards war, and war first of all against aggressive Japanese imperialism. The Japanese ruling class had, like America, taken full advantage of its opportunities while its rivals were helpless to resist, and had fastened the chains of colonial dependency on China, besides invading Siberia for similar purposes. The future of American capitalism was at stake and in the crisis of 1919 to 1921 war seemed imminent and was openly predicted.
In the face of the immediate threat of war neither Japan nor England, despite their financial straits, could afford to permit America’s challenge to go unheeded. Hence began a naval race in comparison with which the Anglo-German building program of 1907-1914 appeared the veriest bagatelle. As against the six largest ships already partly laid down by America, Japan in its eight-eight program proposed to construct eight battleships partly equal to and partly greater in tonnage and superior in arms to the American ships. England planned to lay down twelve vessels, four of which were to incorporate all the lessons of the battle of Jutland and to be the largest dreadnoughts afloat—fifty thousand tons. Nor was the race confined to this one category of ships for it extended to cruisers, aircraft carriers, and to the scouting and screening boats so essential to modern fleets in order to give maximum mobility and effectiveness to the dreadnoughts. By the middle of July 1921 the naval race was in full swing on a far more stupendous scale than in pre-war days. The three major powers had building or projected, thirty-six of the largest fighting vessels ever conceived, to cost a total of one and a quarter billion gold dollars.
The naval race was not confined solely to the construction of bigger and better ships. Warfare, whether on land or on sea, is an affair of positions and such positions are all the more important in the case of a vast trackless waste like the Pacific Ocean. Navies are limited in action by the need for refueling and repair (particularly after a battle) to a specific cruising radius from a base of operations. In the first world war this radius was about five hundred miles but the change to oil fuel and the increase in size of ships has extended the radius of action so that it is put today at three times that distance. What counts in naval warfare is security of the base of operations and safety and freedom of communications. Thus to secure itself against the breaking of its lines of communication with its colonies in the East, England has a whole string of powerfully fortified bases—Gibraltar, Malta, Port Said, Aden, Ceylon, Rangoon and now Singapore and Colombo. American imperialism has reached out into the Pacific to build a string of bases towards China and Asia. In the period preceding the Washington Conference the US began to fortify its possessions closest to the Asian mainland, Guam and Manila, and to strengthen the bases of Hawaii and Samoa. But what aroused the greatest apprehension in Japan was the attempt to lease from China the coast of Fukien province to establish a base directly on the mainland itself. It is clear from statements in the Japanese press that had this lease been accomplished, Japan was prepared to declare war at once.
The direct naval expenditures of the United States had more than trebled after the war. American capitalism was prepared to spend more in a few years of arming than Germany had spent in a quarter of a century. And yet as a result, unless it were prepared to continue the race indefinitely at increasing cost, it would have been left with a second-rate fleet, outclassed by the English and Japanese navies. Furthermore, despite the reservation made by England in the Anglo-Japanese Alliance concerning the US, there was every reason for America to fear that its fleet would have to encounter the combined naval forces of these two rivals. Again the Panama Canal put a limit on the size of battleship useful for the time being to America. When Admiral Fisher first projected the modern dreadnought for the English navy, Germany had been forced to widen the Kiel Canal at enormous expense to allow passage to the new ships. Similarly the Panama Canal could not be used for the passage of battleships the size of the new Japanese and English ones. That is one strong reason for the revival of the old plan for a Nicaragua Canal. All in all, these factors, combined with the economic situation after the war, forced America to seek a truce and to bide its time. The Washington Conference was the result. It provided a breathing spell during which the powers could gather new strength for the inevitable struggle to come.
If Japan now appears as the imperialist force ready to start the naval race anew, it is because the Japanese militarists feel themselves in the most favorable position to carry out their policies of subjugating China and wresting the maritime provinces from the Soviet Union. Japan controls Manchuria, the “historic road of invasion into China”. The Chinese revolution is at its lowest ebb. Time can only aid Soviet Russia and China, not Japan. Furthermore the internal situation in Japan itself is so desperate that the militarists are driven to seek a “solution” in war. That this would be the attitude of the Japanese ruling class was clear to the powers in advance. Hence they have not waited for the actual denunciation of the Pact to commence preparations for the next war. England began some time ago the feverish construction of added facilities and fortifications at Singapore, first begun in 1923. Japan is ready with her submarine bases strung out along the string of mandated islands in the Pacific. America has strengthened her bases in Pearl Harbor and Cavite. All countries are laying in vast stores of technical supplies and working their munitions plants three shifts a day.
The immediate answer given by the United States to Japan was the sending of the entire fleet into the Northern Pacific for a “war game”. This game involves the most stupendous naval force ever known in history with its 177 warships and its 154 war planes. It is engaged in working out the strategy and tactics of the War of the Pacific. Evidently that strategy will avoid the dangerous passage directly west from the United States and will concentrate on an approach from the Aleutian Islands and along the coast of Siberia. The Aleutian Islands are 1,500 miles from the tip of Japan. American capitalism is determined to risk war for the sake of its future. For it is not only the Chinese market that is involved. Once America can secure a base of operations on the mainland of Asia—and this it can only acquire by defeating Japan in war—it can then proceed to oust its greatest competitor, England, from China and from Southern Asia. For though the immediate problem for American imperialism to solve is the replacement of Japanese domination in China by its own, its main problem remains of breaking up the British Empire in order to secure the redivision for its own benefit of the markets of the world now kept closed to it. The conquest of Asia by America would leave England in an almost completely exposed position in the East despite Singapore, so that the US could then proceed to attack India from a direction most open to attack.
When the Philippines were seized from Spain the revolt of the natives did not cease but redoubled in intensity against the new conqueror. We may expect a similar occurrence in China, if America defeats Japan. This conflict between American imperialism and the exploited Chinese may very well develop during the war itself. In either case it will be the task of the American Marxists to lead the American working class in opposing the imperialist war for plunder, in giving every assistance to the oppressed Chinese workers and peasants in their desperate fight to throw off the yoke not only of Japanese but of the American imperialists. A defeat of American capitalism by the proletarian revolution at home, by the conversion of the imperialist war into a civil war, would have the most far-reaching consequences on the entire situation in the East, now filled with the promise of untold misery for the masses, and throughout the entire world. War is a game of politics, of capitalist politics in wars for plunder. The workers must practise proletarian politics during war as during peace. Our tasks are not those of the ruling class for they involve first and foremost the forcible overthrow of that ruling class. We are opposed to the ruling class in all its policies at every stage because in solving its problems abroad it also solves the major problem of maintaining its exploitation of the working class at home. Our appeal must be to the sailors, to teach them the true meaning of the imperialist war, to enlighten them as to the role cut out for them. We must exemplify the meaning of naval war through such affairs as the Battles of Tsushima and Jutland with their appalling loss of life. In modern naval battles, despite the size of ship and the strength of armor and the use of all kinds of safety devices, the largest ships are snuffed out with startling suddenness. It was Winston Churchill who spoke of modern gunfire, of naval salvos, as the use of sledge-hammers to smash eggshells. We must prove to the sailors as to the workers that this is not their war, that it is in reality a war directed against them.
The naval truce has ended and the new armaments race is on. There will unquestionably be further negotiations, further veering and tacking in the attempt to foster illusions among the masses at home by a propaganda of justification for the murderous course pursued by the capitalist class. Under the guise of “disarmament” each of the powers presents schemes involving its own interests and defense. Japan would like to secure limits of size of ships so that she could feel safe from attack by the American fleet. America would like to limit the tonnage and the size of submarines permitted to Japan in order to feel greater safety for a fleet operating at great distances from naval bases. All this propaganda must be exposed for what it is and the reality of the approaching war made manifest to the workers. The naval race is the prelude to war. Down with imperialist war!



Imperialism and the Farmer
Roosevelt has sent his message to Congress on the state of the union. And a sad state it is. Had there been in the past year a sharp upturn, a rapid rise in production, reemployment of many more millions of workers, Roosevelt would have taken credit for all this as the result of the New Deal. As it turns out all the hollowness of the demagogy and ballyhoo of the NRA stands nakedly revealed. True, there has been some recovery of business; employment is above the lowest levels of the crisis; but the illusions created in the minds of many workers that the government would see to the return of prosperity and send them back to the factories in short order have evaporated into thin air. It must be clear to all by now that Roosevelt gambled on the ending of the depression and on the recovery of business in the normal course of things, and that his whole “program” so far as the working class was concerned, was intended to lull the masses into passivity during the worst phase of the crisis.
In his message of last year Roosevelt expressed the hope that the budget could be balanced in the next fiscal year – the year beginning in June 1935. That hope, too, goes by the board with the indication that a deficit of four billions of dollars will be piled up in the coming year, thereby bringing the total federal debt to a record high. With the failure of business to pick up sufficiently to permit balancing of the budget, with the government embarking on a new program of public spending to be financed by government borrowing, further inflation looms in the future as almost a certainty. Of course it is not Roosevelt’s real intention to spend the entire appropriations supposedly made for relief through public works. But if he follows along the course outlined in his message, the treasury, will be forced by the need for refunding previous loans (for example the Liberty Loans that fall due), and the demands for new funds for public works and other “emergency” measures, to borrow some eleven and a half billions of dollars. Such huge government borrowings will exert the most disturbing influence on the entire financial structure of the nation. That is why the government may be compelled to take over greater and greater control of the banking and credit system.
* * *
What is of the utmost importance to both the employed and the unemployed alike, is that part of Roosevelt’s message dealing with relief. He intends to drop as much as possible cash relief and substitute what comes close to being forced labor at low wages, lower than for similar work in private employment. And this, is to be applied particularly in the field of construction. Thus the pre-arranged propaganda extending back for months now, blaming the failure of recovery in the building trades and the field of heavy construction on the refusal of the skilled workers to give up the wage levels and the conditions to which they were heretofore accustomed, is now bearing fruit. The government is stepping in to help beat down the standards of living of the building trades workers. Recovery of heavy industry is to take place by loading all the sacrifices on the backs of the working class. It can be said in advance that the workers will not submit to this program without the sharpest struggles and resistance. The government will find it necessary to use the methods of repression more and more.
* * *
Secretary Wallace Gives the Key
To understand the real meaning of the moves being made by the government one must see them in their entirety as in accord with the historic aims and needs of the American finance capitalists. Such a view is given most clearly in the apparently “liberal” writings of Secretary of Agriculture Wallace. To him it is perfectly clear that America cannot turn to any scheme of autarchy, of a self-enclosed economy. Rather it must rearrange its entire internal economy so as to enable the closest economic ties to be made with the backward agricultural countries of South America and Asia. America, in short, must become more and more imperialistic. It must capture the major world markets for manufactured goods by its mass production methods in the factories. Competition with the other imperialists requires that the costs of production must be extremely low. Hence the drive on workers’ living standards. At the same time, if these other countries are to buy in “our” market, they must be permitted to sell their agricultural products. Hence the program of crop control here, to eliminate those American farmers in competition with the potential buyers. Naturally with this vast program of imperialism goes a complete revision of the tariff system.
 



The judicial arm of the American capitalist government has played an inconsequential role during the period of crisis and the NRA. The august judges, than whom there would seem to be no higher authority but God himself, have felt rather aggrieved at being so completely eclipsed by the executive power in the hands of Roosevelt. But such power on the part of the executive authority becomes inevitable whenever a major crisis threatens the very foundations ol bourgeois rule. There is nothing, in this respect, so firmly established concerning capitalist society, as that the boss class will violate every single law set up by itself, if these laws stand in the way of the fundamental interests or the continued existence of the ruling class. For that matter the ordinary “rights” won by the workers under bourgeois democracy are violated with impunity day by day. In regard to such violations of workers’ rights by the exploiting class, the whole system of courts, including the Supreme Court when the interests of the class in power as a whole are involved, becomes merely a cloak for the proper veiling of class justice from the naive vision of the masses.
But the courts also exist, not merely in their role of judicial means of oppression of the exploited classes by the oppressors, but also to “keep the arena” where property interests come into conflict, causing, at times, deep-going differences within the ruling class itself. In such cases the Supreme Court may be called upon to render a decision generally in accord with the historic interests of the upper strata of the ruling class. The Supreme Court is now “deliberating” over the government’s abrogation of its gold contracts when it went off the gold standard.
* * *
Case of the Gold Standard
It was to the interests of the capitalists, in order to maintain their power and to prevent an even worse collapse of their system than actually occurred, to scale down the entire debt structure within American economy. It was also to the interests of the big financiers to lay the greatest burden of the crisis on the backs of the working class and the petty bourgeoisie. By depreciating the currency these aims were achieved.
Such depreciation amounted to wholesale expropriation of the wealth in the form of savings, common stock, insurance, etc., held by the small people. The big financiers were capable of protecting their own interests so that their wealth was not expropriated at all or to a minor extent as compared with the other classes. Furthermore, going “off gold” or depreciating the currency met the demands of competition for foreign trade due to the money manipulations of other countries. For the working class there was involved a subtle wage cut by this process.
In view of all these effects of the abrogation of the gold clause by the U.S. Government, corresponding to distinct needs of the bourgeoisie, can anyone be under the illusion that the Supreme Court would dare to declare the government’s act unconstitutional?
* * *
Majesty of the Law
In reality the Supreme Court is putting on a show, is covering with the necessary amount of flummery and formality the foregone conclusion of its decision. Hughes has no intention to bring about the chaos that would result from an adverse decision.
* * *
The Constitution Itself
The Marxian who knows the history of the American Constitution itself, is well aware that this sacred document is nothing but the legalization of the capture of power after the American Revolution by the rich, exploiting section of colonial society, destined to become the modern capitalists. The Constitution was designed to protect private property, to prevent interference with this private property by the majority of the people. In short, the Constitution was designed to perpetuate the rule of the rich minority against any attacks by the future proletariat and petty bourgeoisie. Surely a “yardstick” to be respected by this same proletariat which it was designed to keep from attaining to power!
 



The first international imperialist truce in the building of naval armaments has come to its predestined end. Theoretically it will remain in force till 1936; practically the powers are already at work to start off anew in the race for capitalist domination of the world. Lasting for a decade, the Washington Naval Pact was nothing but a temporary truce, affording a breathing spell to the nations just emerged from war into a critical economic and political period that necessitated the most far-reaching changes and adjustments among the imperialist robber nations. In the war Europe, victors and vanquished alike, had lost, America had won. Germany had been ruined, but England was also badly shaken and her world position so much weakened that she could no longer demand and enforce by might of arms complete supremacy on the seas. America had captured the world’s trade, had become a creditor nation on a par with the foremost foreign investor, England. This victory, American capitalism meant not only to retain but to extend at the expense of all other capitalist rivals until it would command that imperialist hegemony of the world that it felt essential to give full and proper play to its advanced technique. To signalize its newly gained strength, America started afresh, on the very eve of the peace conference, a naval plan that “stunned the world”!
* * *
The Imperialist Naval Race
It was the “peace” President Wilson, who proposed the 1916 naval plan that was to give America the largest fleet in the world. He proposed to construct in three years the most powerful dreadnoughts afloat, that would render obsolete all the navies in the world. This program was interrupted by the entrance of the U.S. into the war but at its conclusion, just before Wilson sailed for Paris, he said to Congress: “I take it for granted that the Congress will carry out the naval program which was undertaken before we entered the war.”
In the new 1919 program it was then proposed that in three years America should build sixteen capital ships, besides a large number of cruisers and destroyers. Although England then possessed a bigger navy than all the rest of the world combined, this ambitious program would have placed the U.S. in first place on account of the size of post-Jutland super-dreadnoughts to be built, their weight of armor and guns. The armament race was on!
The new war was to be a decisive battle for supremacy in the Pacific, a conflict for the complete control of the only market still undivided among the imperialist free-booters – China. Primarily this meant a ruthless struggle between America and Japan. Hence Japanese imperialism, despite its relative poverty in money and resources, was forced as a matter of its national capitalist life to respond by starting the construction of even bigger ships with heavier armament and guns than those proposed by America. Nor was England to be outdone, for she too began the laying down of vessels to be the largest in the world.
* * *
Necessity for Truce
In comparison with the Anglo-German naval race of 1907 to 1914, the pre-war affair was a mere bagatelle from every point of view. The cost of the new construction to the U.S. alone would have been more in three years than Germany had spent in twenty-five. And this does not take into account the indirect costs for new docks and harbors to house the new fleet, besides the fortifying of Pacific fuel bases to render the fleet effective.
The cost became a particularly disturbing factor when the slump of 1920 occurred. Then too the Panama Canal acted to limit the new race. For this Canal could afford passage only to the size of vessel allowed for in the American plan, whereas to meet the forty-three and forty-five thousand ton ships of the Japanese and English plans, the U.S. would have had to build ships that could not be passed through the Canal. The threat of an immediate war between America and Japan in 1921 found American capitalism in a difficult position too, since it did not possess any adequate base of operations close enough to the new scene of conflict.
For these and other reasons American imperialism found itself forced to back down temporarily and to call for a truce in the naval race started by itself. The result was the Washington Pact of 1922. In this pact the size of battleships was limited to those capable of traversing the Panama Canal, the five-five three ratio was accepted (England thus yielded its historic mastery of the seas), the Anglo-Japanese Alliance was abrogated, at least in words, and an agreement was arrived at not to fortify the Pacific Islands any further. In the present situation all this stands nullified. Japanese capitalism feels itself firmly enough entrenched in Manchuria, the historic starting-point for all invasions into China, to continue her adventure further. Her demand for naval parity throws down the gauntlet to American imperialism at a time considered favorable by the Japanese militarists American imperialism cannot refuse the challenge. The War of the Pacific seems close at hand.
 



American Imperialism Arrives at a Decision
When Roosevelt granted recognition to the U.S.S.R. his move was Interpreted correctly as being aimed at Japanese imperialism. Undoubtedly it gave pause to the Japanese militarists in the ruthless plundering of China. For to them it meant the prelude to a military alliance, a view that was made highly plausible by the fact that recognition was soon followed by the sending of military and naval attaches to the Soviet Union by the U.S., by the fact that even prior to recognition the Curtis-Wright aircraft concern had been granted permission by the U.S. Army (naturally with the consent of the State Department) to conclude a technical assistance contract with the U.S.S.R. and to build airplane factories in Russia, etc. Only a few weeks, before open announcement of recognition the attitude of the Soviet Union towards Japanese aggression in connection with the Chinese Eastern Railway had undergone a distinct change; the tone of Soviet diplomacy hardened and became less conciliatory. Temporarily the Japanese generals, faced with the possibility of two such foes, whose interests ran parallel only momentarily in common opposition to Japanese aims, uniting against them, were forced to wait and move more cautiously. But since then the international situation has taken new form, new alignments are in process of achievement, and the American capitalists have arrived at a decision. This decision, to make perfectly plain to Japan that there would be no military alliance between the U.S. and the U.S.S.R., is unquestionably related to the stand taken by England in support of the rearmament of Hitler Germany. Thus the whole international situation has become threatening to the Soviet Union. The signal for the war of intervention may be given at any moment.
* * *
American Policy
The question of the debts owed by Russia to the U.S. played only a minor role in Roosevelt’s decision to withdraw military attaches and consuls from the Soviet Union. It provided merely the plausible diplomatic excuse for justification of a provocative act before the masses. For such an act will be (and has been!) interpreted by Japanese militarism and German fascism as a guarantee that they may proceed with the attack on the Soviet Union without fear of interference by U.S. imperialism. The German Tageblatt thus stated that “Apparently Washington intends to demonstrate that there is no military alliance between the two powers.” Washington feels that the interests of American imperialism will be best served by pushing Japan into war against the Soviet Union and then waiting till both countries have become exhausted by the conflict in order to step in and reap the harvest at the expense of both.
* * *
Militarizing of the Pacific
Meantime Roosevelt pursues the “New Deal” policy in the Pacific. That is, he is completely militarizing the Pacific coast and the island “possessions” and laying the necessary foundations for properly carrying on the colossal naval battles of the future. The preparations involve political changes as well as physical ones. Thus the New Deal as applied to Hawaii means the change to a “mainland” governor completely under instruction of the U.S. navy. Millions of dollars are being poured out to construct in Hawaii the largest air base in the Pacific. In addition air bases are being set up rapidly on certain of the Aleutian Islands which form the northern and the safest approach to the Japanese Isles. The Philippines will undergo a similar process at the first opportunity. The propaganda for tightening the military grip on the Philippines is already evident in the announcement by American business interests in the islands of the “discovery” of rich chromite deposits, valuable in war time. Thus it is clear that he U.S., under the guidance of a President who, under the cloak of liberalism, pursues the ends of imperialism, is embarked on a course directed against both the U.S.S.R. and Japan. War between these two countries would afford Roosevelt the full opportunity to go even further in “mechanizing and modernizing” both the army and the navy, and in building the largest navy in the world to carry out the greedy aims of world hegemony of the American financiers.
* * *
War and Fascism
An unforgettable lesson that the capitalists learned in the last world war is that the ruling class must protect itself not only against the rival imperialists abroad, but also against the working class enemy at home. For just as the capitalists carry out similar policies of exploitation at home and abroad, so the working class under proper leadership pursues internal and international policies directly antagonistic to those of capitalism. During war in particular the workers are apt to learn the lesson that no nation can be free at home that exploits other peoples abroad. Hence the capitalist class attempts to guarantee its rear (at home) in wartime by suppressing all working class liberties and wiping out their independent, particularly their revolutionary, organizations. Thus war breeds fascism and the working class must oppose both.
 



Hitler Unmasks German Rearmament
That disquieting open “secret” of European diplomacy, the rearmament of Germany contrary to the Versailles Treaty, has finally become the accomplished fact (fait accompli) that Hitler planned from the start. The acquiescent attitude, however grudging and unwilling, revealed by the British and French governments in the recent negotiations, created for Hitler the proper atmosphere in which to practice his fascist foreign diplomacy. Hitler weighed carefully the consequences of outright denunciation of the Versailles Treaty in regard to the arms clauses at this particular time. No doubt he would have preferred a less open break with the other Western powers, even to the extent of rejoining the League of Nations for equality of armaments.
But the string attached to the negotiations of his signing an Eastern Locarno Pact “guaranteeing” peace with Soviet Russia, was diametrically at variance with the avowed objective of Nazism to expand eastward at the expense of the Soviet Union – at the same time acting as the spearhead of capitalism to crush the workers’ state. Hence Hitler cut the Gordian knot – and saved the English and French diplomats the onus of “permitting” this impetus to the speeding-up of European arming – and decided to call the bluff of the victors of the last war.
The comment on this unmasking of fascist Germany’s preparations for the coming war, particularly in the English press, proves that Hitler judged the situation correctly. Nobody thinks of sending troops into Germany to enforce the terms of a treaty that now goes by default. On the contrary, Hitler meets with distinct encouragement from the reactionaries who draw the same sharp distinction between a Locarno for the West and an Eastern Locarno. Thus the situation becomes ever more ominous for the Soviet Union.
* * *
Stalinism in France
Internally and externally Stalinism pursues the politics of the “lesser evil”; that is to say, the politics of meeting reaction half way. Even before Hitler’s casting off of all hounds that prevented the formation of a conscript army to be hurled against the Soviet Union, Soviet diplomacy strained every nerve to achieve a military alliance with France to maintain the status quo. French capitalism entered conditionally into this alliance as a guarantee against its external foe. German capitalism, and also its internal foe, the French proletariat. The C.P. of France is thus used to uphold the Flandin government as the “lesser evil” to fascism. The French fascists would instantly break off friendly relations with Soviet Russia.
The Stalinists pose the struggle basis to maintain bourgeois democracy. In this popular front – intended to diffuse and weaken the too dangerous united front of the proletarian forces leading the masses – the Stalinists include the bourgeois radical and radical socialist parties in direct alliance with Flandin. The truce government of this shrewd politician meantime pursues a policy, copied from Roosevelt, of constant promises to and just as constant betrayals of the workers. So flagrant have become the extreme right policies of the Stalinists that the left centrist current in the SFIO (French Socialist Party) have begun to sharply criticize them from the left. The Trotskyist fraction in the SFIO are beginning to gain ground and to exert some influence, tending to clarify issues for the militant socialists. In this process the Trotskyists come into greater and greater conflict not only with the right wing of the S.P. but with the Stalinist bureaucracy.
* * *
Danger of a French Amalgam
There can be no clearer explanation for the denunciation heaped on the Trotskyists as police agents by the Stalinists. Where the former call openly, in view of the dangerous situation in France, for the arming of the working class to combat and disarm fascist forces, the Stalinists lead the socialists into the trap of calling on the Flandin government to disarm the fascist bands.
 



A Dangerous Alliance
An item in the press recently, in connection with the General Johnson-Huey Long controversy, reveals a growing line-up of forces that may prove of the utmost danger to the working class. General Smedley Butler came out in hearty support of the “two lions” Long and Coughlin. Here we have a triple alliance of three demagogues who supplement each other in the possibilities of building up the mass basis for an American fascist movement. To the forces of the Delta Dictator, Father Coughlin brings the aid of clerical reaction hiding under the pseudo-radical guise of “social justice”, and Smedley Butler contributes the strength of the military arm of reaction. The real motive of Butler in making his revelations concerning the attempt by Morgan interests to bribe him into leading and organizing a fascist movement here now becomes clear. Butler resorted to a clever bit of advertising to permit him later to act completely in the interests of capitalist reaction under the halo of a great lover of democracy.
The danger to the proletariat from these elements can hardly be exaggerated. They are the symbols heralding the conversion or transformation of the capitalist offensive to terrorize the working class so as to stop further organizing of the unorganized, into a fascist mass movement. The “white terror” of the bosses is intended to prevent the workers from fighting to regain lost ground in the matter of wages and living conditions. The offensive is apparent in the recent court decisions against the labor provisions of the NRA, the Roosevelt decision against the “prevailing wage”, the drive for company unions and against the A.F. of L., the Hearst anti-red campaign, the Sacramento criminal syndicalism case, etc. The answer to this offensive and to the incipient fascist movement will be given by the increased militancy of the working class.
* * *
The Labor Party Fallacy
Nothing reveals more clearly the utter fallacy and bankruptcy of those who call for the formation of an American labor party, than a speech by Alfred Bingham, Farmer-Laborite supporter and editor of Common Sense. The contention of the labor-partyites runs that the American toilers are “beginning to realize the need to separate from the bourgeois parties and to resort to independent political action in their own interests. Owing, however, to the political backwardness of these masses, resulting from historic conditions, they are far from ready to join any outright revolutionary organization. Hence, rather than permit the workers to fall into the clutches of the capitalists through an apparently working class party which is in actuality a third capitalist party, the vanguard must gain control of the movement by rallying the toilers around a program of proper immediate demands.
To separate immediate demands from the revolutionary tasks of the proletariat means to foster illusions in the minds of workers. It means to hold out the hope that the worker can win security and a better life by fighting for concessions under capitalism. This is all the more illusory in this period of the decline of capitalism when the bosses, far from granting more concessions, are actually wiping out all the previous “sops” granted to the workers. Unless immediate demands are made the means of rallying the workers in struggle for the purpose of teaching them at one and the same time the need for revolutionary action as the only real solution, the effect will be to disillusion the workers with false promises.
Our task is not to traffic on the ignorance and backwardness of the masses, not to attempt to win them unawares and by stealth, but on the contrary, to enlighten them and to show them the necessary steps to take along the road to power.
* * *
Shall We Compete with Fascism?
When it comes to immediate demands as such, divorced from a revolutionary program, we cannot hope to compete with the fascist demagogy of fake “promises”. Our answer to the demagogy of the Huey Longs and the Father Coughlins is not a different brand of demagogy, but enlightenment and clear revolutionary answers concerning the meaning of events. To compete under present conditions with the fascists on the basis of rainbow hopes, is to bring about the inevitable defeat of our class. Instead of building a bridge from the labor party to the revolutionary Marxist party, we would build a bridge to fascism. And it is precisely this that Bingham revealed.
He was peeved that Long and Coughlin were stealing a march on the Farmer-Labor Party (which might be substituted by any other labor party). As the New York Times reported: “The movement for a third party under radical-progressive leadership that is rising in the West is in imminent danger of being captured by the “demagogic movement” headed by Huey Long and Father Coughlin, it was asserted last night by leaders of the Farmer Labor Political Federation.” And to fight the demagogy of Long, Bingham proposed a similar type of demagogy – the “dramatization” of the appeal of “Plenty for All”. Bingham’s speech contains his own refutation.
 



Italy’s Colonial Drive
With French and British acquiescence, Mussolini has found a “safe” outlet for the war spirit rabidly fostered by his constant waving of the sword. Emulating the fable of the wolf and the lamb, Il Duce is not to be placated even by the most extreme and abject concessions on the part of the Abyssinians. He is determined to make Ethiopia part of the Italian colonial empire, in accordance with the secret treaty of 1915 that won Italy to the side of the allies in the World War. Gold and oil (the latter recently discovered) are not the only lures drawing Italian imperialism on. Italy has an unfavorable trade balance contributed to by the need for importing food supplies as well as raw materials. Mussolini hopes that the new African colony will help to correct this chronic condition of Italian trade. Besides Italian economy is in a profound crisis and capitalism knows no other means for solving the economic impasse except to resort to war. Unable to bring about the recovery of a decaying system, fascism is forced to turn outwards beyond the national borders in a desperate attempt to start the wheels of industry going by the creation of the destructive demands of war. The Abyssinians were able to beat off the previous attempt made by Italy to subjugate Ethiopia in the war of 1895. But the modern methods of mass destruction leave the backward negro nation utterly helpless to meet attack by an advanced nation.
* * *
Japan and the Chinese Consortium
The negotiations between Tokyo and Nanking, in which Japan practically renewed her infamous twenty-one demands on China, have aroused the greatest anxiety among the other imperialists. Will not the corrupt Chiang Kai-Shek for the sake of a Japanese loan, for help against the peasant red armies and under the threats of even greater attacks on China by the Japanese militarists than have yet taken place, yield to Japan? If this occurs, China will become to all intents and purposes the colony of Japan. No deeper feelings of “righteous and moral” indignation could possibly be aroused in the breasts of the American and English capitalists than at the thought that they were to be permanently excluded from obtaining their share of plunder in China. No wonder that Ambassador Lindsay hurried quickly to confer with Under-Secretary of State Phillips and with the French Ambassador in order to arrive at an understanding of what joint action could be taken to hinder Japanese plans. Formally they raise the question of the violation of the Consortium Agreement of 1920 according to which no loan was to be made to China except with the agreement and participation of all these powers. Naturally Japan is flouting this bandits’ agreement, seeing her chance. In this game of capitalist diplomacy the interests of China and her masses are completely ignored and play no part. Nor will they play any role until the Chinese workers are heard once again in the next revolutionary upsurge.
* * *
Roosevelt and “Prevailing Wage”
How serious is the struggle between Roosevelt and the Senate over the prevailing wage clause added to the work relief measure? Certainly Roosevelt suffered a political set-back by the addition of the McCarran amendment. But It would be childish to think that the majority of those who forced through the amendment were really interested in protecting the wage scales of employed workers. The Senate had been warned in advance that a measure containing this provision would be vetoed by the President. Hence it cost it nothing at all to avoid the loss of labor votes in the coming elections by making the gesture that would satisfy Green and the A.F. of L. One of the motives back of the entire maneuver was undoubtedly dissatisfaction with the high-handed manner in which Roosevelt has handled the vast funds placed at his disposal. The Senators would like to have more to say concerning where and how this money is to be spent. They miss their former control of the pork barrel. This was shown clearly by the representatives despite the fact that the measure was passed by them without demur. But they were opposed to having the money administered by Secretary Ickes who failed to satisfy the politicians in his dishing out of spoils. Hence even the House refused to pass the measure until after a conference at the White House at which the leaders were reassured as to control and uses of the “mystery” fund of nearly five billions of dollars. One can safely predict that a “compromise” will be reached that sacrifices entirely the interests of the workers under the proper phraseology, giving Roosevelt precisely what he wants. This will be accomplished by the simple Roosevelt expedient of buying Senate votes by satisfying the proper politicians with their share of the booty. The question remains as to what Roosevelt will actually do with the funds appropriated. How much of it will actually go to workers, how much to subsidize the construction industries? Under the demagogic guise of work relief a large portion of the fund will go not to workers for wages, but to capitalist corporations to provide the materials for the work. Roosevelt has no intention of spending five billions to provide work alone. Rather he will pump profits into the coffers of the financiers.
 



The AAA and the Tenant Farmer
Just as the development of capitalist industry results in the ever greater concentration of wealth in the hands of the few fabulously rich financiers, so the development of capitalist farming exhibits also the concentration of land ownership in the hands of fewer and fewer land barons. By means of its complex control of the market for agricultural products, of the prices charged to farmers for the goods they need, and of the credit system, monopoly finance capital exploits the small farmer more intensively than under any previous economic system. Helpless against the gigantic forces not of nature but of monopoly capitalism, the farmer gradually falls into hopeless debt through the process of mortgaging his land, his home, even his future crop in his desperate struggle to keep from starving.
The bankers’ mortgage system is merely a stage in the degradation of the independent farmer to land tenancy and into share-cropping and the status of farm laborer. The capitalist ruling class in the advanced countries observe this inevitable process with dread, for it creates the allies of the proletariat in the struggle for power and thus menaces the “social stability”. American capitalism is now face to face with the problem of “stabilizing” agriculture and subsidizing farmers so as to maintain them for use against the working class when it becomes necessary. The AAA was created with this in view and was intended to aid in “solving” the farm problem. Actually its attempts reveal, leaving aside the hypocrisy of every ruling class when dealing with the exploited and oppressed, the utter inability of capitalism to solve the farm problem.
* * *
Driving Farmers Off the Land
The report by the Committee on Minority Groups in the Economic Recovery, just issued, shows how the AAA has worked not in the interests of the actual farmers, but in those of the exploiters of these farmers through the well-established modes of usury. The bankers have been enabled to borrow funds at low rates of interest and to loan out these same funds at the usual extortionate rates. Far from “stabilizing” the farming industry, the policy pursued by the government under the New Deal has had the effect of degrading the lot of the tenant farmer even more, and of actually driving him off the land.
Curtailment of crops to raise prices has put out of employment hundreds of thousands of tenant farmers in the South. It pays the landlord to evict these tenants, whites and blacks alike, thereby evading all responsibility for feeding them and throwing them on the starvation relief handed out by the government. Meantime, while its policies result in this wholesale wave of evictions and driving of farmers off the land, the government makes empty gestures of establishing “subsistence homesteads” and “peasant proprietorships”. And this is the reactionary solution offered by the Committee on Minority Groups. Only socialism, not capitalism, can really set out to solve the agricultural problem, by organizing the farmers into collectives and giving them a fair exchange in manufactured goods and services for their crops.
* * *
The Attack on Trotsky
The constantly growing and ever more vicious attacks made in the Stalinist press on Comrade Trotsky, assume more and more the aspect of a widespread preparation, for new efforts of the Soviet bureaucracy to perpetrate a frame-up against him. In their desperate eagerness to trick the working class into believing that Trotsky can, by some occult process known only to the Stalinists, be lumped together with counter-revolutionists and white guards, not to mention police agents, the Stalinists form a real united front with bourgeois reaction.
Nothing would suit the French reactionaries more than to see this Bolshevik-Leninist snuffed out of existence. They recognize that the real menace to French capitalism comes from those revolutionists who are working to create the Fourth International. The New International would at the same time he a menace not to the Soviet Union to the defense of which it would be devoted, but to the corrupt bureaucracy that has ruled In Russia since Lenin died. In order to scotch the growing movement of workers in the countries of Western Europe for the creation of the Fourth International, as symbolized by the building of the new Dutch Revolutionary Party, the Stalinists feel it necessary to discredit Comrade Trotsky.
Their effort at a “plant” in the Kirov assassination – through a letter that the GPU had hoped to obtain with the aid of a foreign consul – fell through. But this makes all the more likely a new and worse attempt in France where the Soviet bureaucracy feels its whole opportunist policy jeopardized by the revolutionary course pursued by the Bolshevik-Leninist fraction of the French Socialist Party. The growing and concerted attacks in such sheets as the Daily Worker thus merely serve to set us on our guard against the danger of a new frame-up against Comrade Trotsky.
 



STORM CLOUDS OVER ASIA
Our Growing Pacific Problem
by Robert S. Pickens
Funk and Wagnalls Co. New York, x+242 pp. $1.50.
This is one of a growing series of books devoted to a problem whose solution becomes more urgent daily to the American bourgeoisie. For it is from the point of view of American imperialism that the writer analyzes the tangled skein of events in the Far East. Reluctant as the capitalist governments may be to engage in armed hostilities (the October revolution has cast the deepest shadow of uncertainty on the fate of the imperialist nations in the next war), American necessities are speeding this country headlong into the Pacific maelstrom to put an end once for all to the uncertainty as to who shall be master in the Pacific. The ruling class in the United States has to stake its future on the outcome of war, for it is determined that American and not Japanese imperialism shall subjugate China and then all Asia for the purposes of exploitation.
The “literary” preparation for the inevitable war in the Orient will soon take on the proportions of a flood of propaganda to justify all the actions deemed necessary by monopoly capitalism. Pickens sets the tone for the rallying of the masses to the “just” cause of the Morgans and Laments and to aid them to see the righteousness of sending the navy to defend the future of the American bankers in the East. Naturally it is the Japanese who are alone responsible for making it impossible to preserve the peace of the world. Of course in the past American imperialism did play a role that one cannot justify, but this was more through blundering and ineptness of statesmen than by design. And at any rate modern America is different and has mended its ways. And not only the United States but all the major powers – except Japan!
“All the major powers excepting Japan have come to the realization that old methods [of imperialist plundering] have not worked either towards peace or prosperity.”
At the moment Italy is proving this by dropping bombs on the aggressive Abyssinians, the United States shows its idealist aspirations in Cuba and Bolivia, France and Spain are heartbroken each time they are “forced” to bayonet the natives of North Africa, etc. It is tragically unfortunate that the Japanese people (and they alone!) groan under the yoke of a brutally rampant militarism, still feudal in character and under no restraint of government since they control their government in the vise of armed dictatorship. Surely it is clear to the entire world that “the sincere but childlike idealism of the US, and the enlightened selfishness of Europe have gone on the rocks of a highly developed and cynical Japanese militarism”. The situation in the Pacific “will show whether the peace can be kept by a country which has not been subdued by war. It is the trial of strength between intelligence and force.”
The special pleading for an imperialism that threatens, in seeking world hegemony, to engulf the earth in wars more destructive, more devastating than any the world has yet seen – for American capitalist technique will introduce a new scale of measurement in the powers of destruction – is mingled with a , superficial, journalistic survey of the forces at work in Asia. Profound social (class) analysis is far beyond the depths of the author. After a cataloguing of the events of the Chinese revolutions, Pickens draws a great sigh of relief that Chiang Kai-Shek showed real ability by beheading the proletarian revolution and ending the communist menace. Thus was defeated the purpose of Borodin, that genius of revolution who understood the Chinese mind as nobody had ever done before (Pickens’ version), who sought “to bring on complete chaos”. The social volcano on which, Japanese militarism rests is dismissed with a few sentences of acknowledgment. The Soviet Union is dealt with gingerly, as the possible ally of the US in the coming struggle. But the book appeared before the recent change in policy towards Soviet Russia.
By far the best chapter in a book that offers little beyond the well-known facts, is that which treats of Roosevelt’s New Deal in the Pacific. Here the writer drops the tone of cant and presents the facts realistically. Roosevelt’s financial policies have been used wherever possible to combat the financial penetration of Japan into China. This is shown by the remonetizing of silver and by the loan made through the RFC, ostensibly for the purchase of American cotton, actually to be converted into cash for the purchasing of American munitions and to aid Chinese war preparations. Roosevelt is treading softly, but preparing “the big stick”. He is completely militarizing the Pacific. Thus the Hawaiian government is undergoing drastic reorganization, with a “mainland” governor working under the control of the US navy. A tremendous naval base is being constructed in Hawaii. The navy has been sent permanently into the Pacific to lay out its strategy and to be ready for The Day. As to the Philippines, Pickens almost froths at the mouth at the criminal idea of relinquishing them at the moment when they become of such paramount importance.
“The Hawes-Cutting-Hare Bill, purporting to give them their independence, is the dirtiest blot on the soiled pages of the history of American dealings in the Philippines.”
Recognition of Soviet Russia is shown to have given pause to the Japanese and at the same time to have stiffened the resistance of the workers’ state. Pickens wrote the book before Roosevelt gave the clear indication recently that his aim is to involve the Japanese in a war against the Soviets, with the American bourgeoisie preparing during this war to reap the benefits at the expense of both the weakened combatants. This is the essence of the New Deal in the Pacific.
 




F.D.R. Warns Soviets ...
Through Secretary of State Hull, Roosevelt has given warning to the Soviet Union that he expects Russia to keep its pledge given at the time recognition was granted. Hull makes it perfectly plain in his statement to the press that what America had in mind in demanding Litvinov’s signature to Article 4 of the pledge was one institution and one institution only: the Comintern. “The language of the above-quoted paragraph irrefutably covers activities of the Communist International, which was then, and still is, the outstanding world communist organization, with headquarters at Moscow.” Since Krestinsky rejected the protest of the United States against the holding of the Seventh World Congress of the C.I. in Moscow, Hull warns that the official relations between the two countries may be seriously impaired.
Meantime Walter Duranty expresses for the Stalinists their utter amazement that this Seventh Congress should in any way be confused with the earlier congresses which really aimed at advancing the interests of the world proletarian revolution. Duranty tells the bourgeoisie to look beneath the left phrases at the political realities as expressed in the entire course of Stalinism, and not to take too seriously the mere echoes of the past that have no more real content so far as the C.I. is concerned. But in the matter of relations between the U.S. and the U.S.S.R., it is not so much any violations of a pledge that counts [sic], as does the main, aim and objective of the American bourgeoisie in the near future. These aims concern the period preceding the Second Imperialist World War for redivision of the world.
 

Aim of U.S. Capitalism ...
Press comment stresses that Roosevelt was motivated in his present move against the Soviet Union by the exigencies of the coming Presidential elections. He desired to rob his reactionary critics of one of their main arguments proving Roosevelt to be “radical”: his attitude towards the Soviet Union. But it should be clear that while this is undoubtedly involved, Roosevelt would never have taken this further step towards the break of relations with the Soviet Union if it had not been in line with the major interests of the capitalist class. It follows on the heels of the refusal to grant Russia credits, and on the heel of the withdrawal of consuls and military attaches from the Soviet Union. It is thus a renewed guarantee to Japan that the United States will not aid Russia when the Japanese start the attack.
Recognition of the Soviets came at a time when Japan was threatening a rapid advance and deeper penetration into China. Involved in the domestic crisis and unprepared for a military conclusion, the American capitalist class found it necessary to impede the advance of Japanese imperialism by threatening a military alliance with Russia. This move succeeded for the time being, but could not be a permanent solution of the problem of the Pacific. When Japan resumed its conquest and plunder of China, America changed its course and decided to push Japan into a war of intervention against the Soviet Union. This would weaken both and permit the United States to step in at the moment of exhaustion to defeat its Japanese rival as well as the Soviet Union which would meantime be taken care of from the West through the attack by Hitler.
It is with this strategy in mind that the U.S. is now engaged in a vast project of militarizing the entire Pacific, establishing air bases and naval bases in all its possessions and as near to Japan as possible. Every move with respect to the Soviet Union thus has Japan in mind also. H.B. Hinton, writing in the New York Times of Sept. 1, emphasizes this:
“Far Eastern experts were called into consultation and the situation was viewed from a perspective including Japan. Our official students of Russian affairs know that Maxim Litvinov, the People’s Commissar for Foreign Affairs, obtained at least two years of security on his Far Eastern border when he negotiated the recognition of his government with Pres. Roosevelt. Russian relations with Japan almost immediately took on a better aspect, the Chinese Eastern dispute was settled ...”
What Hinton fails to add is that the American imperialists also secured by this means the holding back for the same period of Japan’s march into Asia, at least of the speed of this march.
American diplomacy subordinates all other tasks to this major task: the defeat of Japanese imperialism. The neutrality law – so-called – is a move subordinated to this same aim. The United States wants to have no entanglements in Europe. Her interest in peace is the same profession in words and violation in deeds as that of Mussolini who pours his troops into Africa, or Baldwin who rushes the British navy into the Mediterranean. Similarly Roosevelt is setting the guns in the Pacific and smoothing the path for the air and naval raiders in the coming war.
Sept. 2, 1935
 




Army Rule in the Philippines ...
In the modern world the crude methods of direct and brutal colonial oppression by the “advanced” imperialist nations are resorted to only as a final means when more subtle methods fail. It is far easier and no more costly for the foreign exploiters to strike a mutually helpful bargain with the native bourgeoisie and its representatives. In Cuba the puppets Mendieta and Battista take their orders from the American capitalists through the United States Minister. In the Philippines the figure-head Quezon will take his orders from the “military adviser” McArthur, whose appointment to that post has just been announced. In the very way in which the news is made public, there is revealed the “open secret” that the election of Quezon was a pre-determined, cut-and-dried affair. The elections have only just been completed and yet it is stated that Quezon, precisely Quezon, had called for the appointment of General McArthur last summer. This is obviously revealed only now, after the elections, since it might have embarrassed Quezon in his campaigning. The United States Army, with commendable courtesy and in a spirit of cooperation, has graciously consented to transfer the former Chief of Staff to this new service, to help supervise the organization of the national defense forces for the new ‘commonwealth’ government of the Philippine Islands. Under McArthur’s rule the work of militarizing the Islands and the adjacent possessions will go forward to completion. The Philippines will be made a strong naval and air base for use in the coming war with Japan.
 

Gentleman’s Agreement
Not that the threat of this war has again reached the acute stage. On the contrary, it suits the aims of both countries at this time to cultivate each other’s friendship. Thus Ambassador Saito has just arrived at a ‘gentleman’s agreement’ with Washington to limit the volume of textiles to be exported by Japan to the Philippine market. This was done in order to avoid the imposing of an additional 50 to 75 per cent duty on Japanese goods entering the Philippines. The Japanese have even agreed to accept a smaller quota than the 52 per cent they had captured in 1934. This avoidance of a trade war in textiles may be extended to the general exports of the rapidly expanding Japanese capitalism to the United States and its possessions. But lest it be inferred that the threat of war in the Pacific area is abating, one has only to glance at the enormous imports of scrap steel and other forms of steel from the United States to Japan. The latter has increased her average takings of these vital materials by 800 percent. This means that in the last thirty months Japan has imported more of this war material than in the previous eight years combined. Despite the rise in price that has resulted, the rate of import has, if anything, increased.
* * *

Anglo-Japanese Alliance
What is of greater importance to both the Soviet Union and to U.S. imperialism, there are rumors of a revival of the Anglo-Japanese alliance. Speculation concerning the mission of the English economist Leith-Ross in the Far East centers on this interpretation. With the naval race in full swing as the result of the scrapping of the Washington naval truce, the English find themselves more exposed than ever to attack in and from the Far East. The Italian threat to the Mediterranean line of communications that is like a sacred cow to British imperialism, only serves the more to emphasize England’s weakness at the far end of these communications in Singapore. An alliance with Japan would serve to check the threat of the latter to build a canal through Siam that would “short-circuit” Singapore and shorten the route to India by two or three days. Japan would be given assurances against America and would police the Far East for the interests of both imperialists. Japan could then feel free to launch her attack finally against the Soviet Union. The resumption of this Far Eastern alliance would be in line with England’s policy with respect to Germany; that is, of encouraging Hitler to expand eastwards at the expense of the Soviet Union.
* * *

Revolutionary Action Against Imperialist War
All these machinations of the imperialist robbers are directly and violently opposed to the vital interests of the world proletariat. This is the manner in which the bourgeoisie propose to maintain the system of exploitation, against the physical and economic well-being of the working class. The organizer and leader of the British Labor Party, Herbert Morrison, defending his betrayal of the working class by the support of British imperialism, says: “We are not interested in the struggles of rival imperialists and we are not going to be drawn into them.” Such an ostrich policy places the workers in chains and hands them over to imperialist slaughter. On the contrary, vve are vitally interested to oppose by revolutionary means all the machinations of all imperialists.
 




Obstruction Threatens Robber League
The League of Nations was organised by the victorious Allies after the first World War to safeguard their plunder against the attacks of the defeated powers. Its function as the “organizer of peace” was to maintain the status quo, to guarantee to the imperialists their colonial possessions and the right to exploit the colonial peoples. The attempt by Mussolini to seize Ethiopia is a threat to the very existence of the robbers’ League precisely because it ends the truce, threatens the status quo, and reopens all the antagonistic issues temporarily “settled” by the first World War. Rearmament and realignments of the advanced capitalist nations are the preparations for the assault by each against all for a new division of the earth. One after the other, each great power that is forced by its internal economic crisis to seek desperately for a solution by outward expansion, quits the League n order to be free to act without hindrance. First it was Japan in order to plunder China, then Germany to rearm for expansion to the East, and now Italy for the swallowing of Ethiopia. Not even the bourgeois press tries to foster any illusion that France or Great Britain is in the least concerned about the fate of the Ethiopian people. Each of these powers, with a tremendous colonial empire, is acutely aware that the “deprived” states aim to capture part of the plunder it took earlier It is the fear of the deep repercussions of Mussolini’s adventure that causes England and France to threaten Italy with sanctions to force a compromise without war But the very threat is driving Italy out of the League.
* * *

Attitude of British Labor
The Ethiopian crisis is a class issue of fundamental significance It becomes the test of the working class movement in all countries For in face of the threat of the second World War, the working class must once more take a stand on the question of defense of the national capitalist state in an imperialist war. The answer of the British Labor Party and of the official labor movement is a shameful betrayal of the proletariat. The demand of the official labor leader for the support of the League of Nations in the applications of sanctions, means not the support of the Ethiopian people against Italian aggression, but the support of English imperialism against Italian. To suppose that the League of Nations could act in the interest of the exploited peoples, is to place confidence in the English capitalists. Where is there any demand that the English ruling class give up British Somaliland, or India or Egypt? How is it that no voice is raised by the “official” movement against the small war just started in India, against the mere punitive expedition into the territory of the Mohmands in the Northern native states? It is by such fakes as the support of “sanctions” that the leaders of British labor tie the workers to the bourgeoisie, enlist them for national defense and for the support of English imperialism.
True there is a small minority of “left socialists” like Cripps who warn the workers against putting their heads in a noose by supporting sanctions and who point to British imperialism. But these elements organize no real mass movement against British imperialism and its role in the next World War. The Bolshevik-Leninists of England, who understand the need for rallying the masses against the enemy at home, who set forth clearly the steps necessary to convert imperialist war into civil war, are too meager a force as yet to exert much influence. They have before them the tremendous task of building the revolutionary party.
* * *

Effect on British General Elections
The betrayal of the working class by the Labor Party in its class collaborationist attitude on the war danger plays directly into the hands of the ruling class in the coming general elections. By covering the national capitalists with the cloak of national defense and the supposed desire for peace, the Labor Party leads the workers to believe that in the national emergency the bourgeoisie may be trusted with the power. If it is all right to conduct a war, if necessary, the masses will prefer to leave things in the hands of those who are more experienced in such matters. By showing this readiness for civil peace in case of war the Labor Party aids the bourgeois campaign of patriotism. It furthers, whether it likes it or not, the armament propaganda, for sanctions mean the need for force to back them up and force might just as well be as effective as possible. Thus the Labor Party is helping to defeat itself in the coming elections. The masses will prefer to give support to the masters directly rather than to their lackeys in the labor movement.
 




The Voting in Memel ...
Hitler is taking full advantage of the Italian imperialist threat against Ethiopia as well as the “moral” weapon made to order for rabid nationalism by the actions of the Lithuanian government. It is not hard to understand that the Lithuanian bourgeoisie, seizing Memel by force in a desperate effort to break through the strangling grip on economy of its own national boundaries, would hardly scruple to maintain that conquest by suppression of the Germans opposed to the seizure. Since the balloting for the Memel Diet to take place on Sept. 29th will be interpreted, particularly by Hitler, as a form of plebiscite, the Lithuanian ruling class tried to prevent a “German” victory, or at least to minimize it, by means of a new electoral law passed August 27th. The purpose of the law was to disenfranchise the pro-German majority which prevented “cooperation” between the Memel Diet and the government officials appointed by Lithuania. The Nazis have encouraged Germans to become Lithuanian citizens in order to vote Nazi, with the express promise that they would recover their German nationality without difficulty once Memel had been recaptured by Hitler. Hence the new law denies the right to vote to those naturalized Lithuanian citizens who hold a promise from a foreign nation that their original citizenship may be reassumed at a later time. The vote is also denied to members of organizations which have been condemned for working against Lithuanian independence or which call for the alienation of a part of the Lithuanian state. All of which is quite obviously aimed at the “treasonable” Nazi elements.
* * *

Threat Of War ...
Hitler, with that twisted sense of justice typical of reactionary capitalist defenders, at the same time that he disenfranchises the Jews violates the conditions laid down by the League of Nations for the Saarland, raises a great outcry against the Lithuanian oppressors. The Nazis have massed troops at the Lithuanian border to take advantage of any eventuality. Should a world war break out immediately, the German Army will have an initial objective in the taking of Memel. Even without the outbreak of war elsewhere, the threat of war exists in this struggle over national boundaries. For the workers the struggle over national boundaries, even where a small state like Lithuania is involved, can be viewed only as part of the general clash of different imperialists. Each ruling class is trying to extend its sphere of exploitation of the working class. The solution for the proletariat lies not in defending the national boundaries of the capitalist state, which can only mean support of the national bourgeoisie, but the revolutionary overthrow of the national bourgeoisie, German or Lithuanian, by the workers and the setting up of a proletarian state. Extension of the rule of the workers would mean the wiping out of national boundaries, themselves one of the symbols of class rule. The problem of the Memel workers will not be solved by aiding Hitler to regain Memel for Germany but can only be solved by the proletarian revolution striving to bring about the Soviet United States of Europe.
 




The Division of Ethiopia
The imperialist robbers have evidently reached agreement on the proper share of the “white man’s burden” that each is to bear in Ethiopia. The inordinate ambitions of fascist Rome have yielded, in part to the never satisfied hunger of the British lion. The Lake Tana region of Ethiopia has been recognized by Mussolini as sacrosanct to English capitalism. The English can pursue their vast project in the Sudan and Egypt for the building of a cotton empire which shall render Great Britain free from all dependence on the United States as a source of this precious raw material. The success of this enterprise depends on absolute control of the waters that give fertility to the land, the waters that flow from Lake Tana into the Blue Nile. This was one of the major interests that Britain felt to be threatened by the Italian thrust into Ethiopia. While the gestures at Geneva continue out of sheer inertia and in order to present some sort of facade for a structure that has long since crumbled, the real imperialist “solution” involving arrangements among Italy, France and England has been achieved. The spoils having been divided, the growls of the English lion will subside. English diplomacy will now devote itself, as it has been preparing to do since the start of the present crisis, to casting all blame on France for the failure to stop the seizure of Ethiopia by the Italian army. This propaganda will also serve to merge into justification of a more and, more outright diplomacy of alliances in Europe. Already the writers are coining the phrase that will carry the gullible masses over to the new state of affairs. There will be not a League of Nations but Leagues of Nations. England will enter into such leagues to guarantee the peace in Western Europe, but not in Eastern Europe where “there will never be peace unless the nations there are left to work out their own salvation,” as Sidebotham writes in the London Times. How hypocritical this is can be seen in the methods adopted by English capitalism to leave alone Russia and the East of Europe. The British navy is being expanded at breakneck speed, the armaments and munitions plants belch smoke night and day. At the same time England aids Germany materially and diplomatically in its preparations for the attack on the Soviet Union. Everywhere on the continent England is planning carefully for the new and inevitable world war.
* * *

Forces in British Labor
The Brighton Congress of the Labor Party in England adopted a resolution on the war crisis as shameful as any of those adopted by the social democratic parties in 1914. This social-patriotic betrayal of labor through supporting the application of “sanctions” by the ruling class, puts to the test every real militant worker in England. A confused movement of opposition has developed against the misleaders who entice the working class into the steel trap set by imperialism. This oppositional movement is strung out ideologically speaking from the crassest kind of Christian pacifism to the clearest-cut revolutionary Marxism. The Socialist League under the leadership of Sir Stafford Cripps is not entirely pacifist as might seem at first sight. In its ranks there is developing a real current, a centrist current, of left socialism moving towards Marxism. If this League sticks to its guns, the very struggle against the Labor Party bureaucrats will push it further to the left. At Brighton there were signs of the possibility that the Socialist League might be expelled from the party. This would undoubtedly raise the question of fusion with the Independent Labor Party. The latter is the only party that has taken a clear-cut revolutionary position against sanctions and against British imperialism, despite its ideological shortcomings on Marxist principles. This very stand means the further drawing away of the I.L.P. from the Comintern with its social-patriotic program. Under the circumstances, by the very defense of its present course, the I.L.P. tends to throw off the clinging remnants of Stalinism and to begin to move more rapidly to the left. The Bolshevik-Leninists in this party, small as are their forces, begin to exert considerable ideological influence and to lend their aid in clarifying the international position of the I.L.P. Should the Socialist League be expelled and join with the I.L.P., its first influence would very likely tend to strengthen the centrists in the I.L.P. But the impetus given to the entire movement of the working class by a unification of militants, would lend prestige to the revolutionary vanguard in their fight to secure the adoption of a revolutionary Marxist program, that of the Fourth International. A unified party of this nature could not affiliate with either the Second or the Third International – by virtue of the very origin, of its being, since it would come into existence through opposition to the course of both these organizations of reformism. Hence the question of the Fourth International, whether Cripps and other centrists like it or no, would become a vital issue. Thus there is the bare possibility of far-reaching consequences for the English workers in the present struggle for and against sanctions.
 




Renewed Menace to China
Japan will not miss its opportunity to make further inroads into China while the other imperialists are preoccupied with the Ethiopian situation. There is every indication that Japanese imperialism is preparing more extended operations for plundering China. A series of extraordinary meetings of the Japanese army and navy commanders and. the diplomatic corps are in progress. One meeting is to take place in Dairen October 13 to 15. A second in which the various consular officials in China are to receive instructions from the army is scheduled for October 16 in Shanghai. A final gathering of all army commanders to work out details of the next steps in the seizure of China, is also planned in Shanghai for Oct. 20 and 21. The pronouncements of the Japanese Military Attaché in China, Maj. Gen. Isogaye, provide several keys to what is intended. A “final” settlement of the North China problem is first on the agenda. The Kuomintang government is told plainly what is expected of it by its imperialist ally.
“We do not want to provoke a crisis in North China but we hope that the Chinese will themselves make all the necessary changes to assure the establishment of authority with a responsible person at the head, who would have Japan’s confidence ... However, should a crisis arise which would endanger the lives of foreigners, Japan will be ready to make sacrifices to take the necessary steps for establishing a strong North China regime.”
What this means is the setting up of an extended puppet state to include the five provinces north of the Yellow River: Hopei, Chahar, Suiyuan, Shansi and Shantung, all now under Japanese control.
***

Which Theatre of War? ...
There have been previous indications that Japan wishes to add to its present booty Outer Mongolia. This territory is not nearly so important economically as Manchuria. Rut its control by Japan would determine the main theatre of war in the coming struggle against the U.S.S.R. Manchuria is too close to Japan to suit the Japanese strategists. Soviet aircraft are a menace not to be neglected. The seizure of Outer Mongolia would permit greater safety to the attack from the northwest corner of Manchuria, from the railroad line running from Hailar to Manchuli, on Chita, the most important railroad junction in Eastern Siberia. Chita is the point at which the main line of the Transsiberian Railroad (to Vladivostok) joins the branch line to Manchuli. The seizure of Chita would cut off communication with the Maritime Provinces over this railroad and would make the main seat of war the territory about Lake Baikal. Already special Japanese divisions in full war strength, with large numbers of tanks and armored cars are concentrated about Hailar. The latter is an important air base. The military railroad from Jehol Province to Dolonor was built to aid the penetration into Outer Mongolia. But the attack on Outer Mongolia can only mean the prelude to war against the Soviet Union.
* * *

Attack on South China ...
The plundering of China is not to be confined to North China alone. The situation at Swatow threatens to become the pretense for the beginning of Japanese invasion into South China. Already all shipping to this port is forced to pass between two lines of Japanese cruisers and destroyers, holding the harbor in a tight grip. The Japanese object to the tax imposed by the Canton militarists on rice imported into Kwantung Province which raises only a two months supply of this necessity for thirty-five million people. The Japanese have been smuggling tremendous quantities of cheap Siamese rice into the province. The seizure of a small quantity of this smuggled rice has precipitated the issue, Japan claiming a violation of the treaty permitting only the national import tax, not involved here. By this pretext Japanese imperialism seeks to gain control of the vast trade of the East River District of Kwantung. At the same time this is a blow at the Canton militarists whose military machine is based on the so-called agricultural tax. The Chinese are entrenching along a fifty mile front in Kwantung expecting momentarily an ultimatum, to be immediately followed by invasion. The reactionary bandit-generals of Canton will hardly organize any real resistance to Japanese encroachments, no more than the “central” Kuomintang leaders, Chiang Kai-Shek and Wang Ching-Wei. On the contrary, these corrupt betrayers of the Chinese enter into competition to become the first to sell out to the imperialists. The other imperialist powers are greatly disturbed at the present situation, seeing in it not only the potentialities of another Shanghai incident, but also a fresh move of Japanese militarism. American warships have been sent to Swatow to take care of “American interests.”
 




Britain Prepares ...
The imperialist nation with the greatest colonial empire naturally has the most to lose in the attempt by lesser powers to redivide the world, and reallocate the raw materials and the markets that mean life and death to modern capitalism. By its invasion of Ethiopia Italy has served notice that the time has come for the posing of this question once more in Europe, as well as in the entire world. The preparations that were being made for the inevitable world war have been tremendously accelerated by this event. Not only has there been a dizzying speeding up of the production and stocking of munitions and the raw materials that enter into their making, but the diplomatic preparations in the maneuvering for alliances have been given a staccato tempo. Eden for England, Goering for Germany, Beck for Poland hasten from capital to capital seeking the best bargains in the holocaust each is helping to prepare. Baldwin announces that England’s previous preparations have been mere play compared to what is to come, for Britain is about “to rearm in earnest.” This imperialist rearmament is cloaked under the hypocrisy of defending peace. The “sanctions” of the League of Nations is in reality the sanctioning of this rearmament for keeping the exploited colonial peoples under the brutal heel of British imperialism. The robber League of Nations now becomes the instrument par excellence for creating the illusions of “right and justice,” for justifying social patriotism, for binding the working class hand and foot and delivering them helpless into the bloody, hands of the bourgeois ruling class. The propaganda for justifying imperialist war is made to center around the League of Nations and its “sanctions.”
* * *

Stalinism Aids the Bourgeoisie ...
Why shouldn’t Baldwin use the arguments of justification presented to him by Stalin? What better method could he adopt than this for fooling the proletariat? Baldwin tells the British workers that England is preparing for war “not only because of Italy’s present defiance, but because of the challenge which all dictatorships have thrown down to the free, peoples of Europe.” This is the poisonous propaganda of the Comintern taken up, as was only to be expected, by those whom it will benefit. This is the attitude that motivates the “People’s Front,” the vicious distortion of the united front that makes of it an instrument not of the revolutionary proletariat, but of class collaboration and truce with one’s own bourgeoisie. Stalinism helps the capitalists in the so-called democratic countries to send their workers willingly to the slaughter. Meantime the British ruling class propose, purely in the interests of democracy, no doubt, to take all precautions against the workers at home. Their first proposal is to concentrate government power in the hands of their most direct and most reactionary representatives, rather than to permit any less reliable indirect representative, even one like MacDonald who has proved his faithfulness to the national bourgeoisie, to remain in control. Hence the rulers are now choosing their own time for parliamentary elections so as to crushingly defeat the Labor Party on the issue of war and patriotism. In this vital struggle the Labor Party has capitulated in advance by its anti-revolutionary stand on sanctions, the League of Nations and war. This stand may please the Stalinists but it can only arouse the bitterest indignation in the heart of every revolutionary worker Who cannot but see in it the course of betrayal that was followed similarly by the Second International in 1914.
***

The Enemy at Home ...
The Labor Party, just as the Second International, points to the enemy abroad and helps to divert the attention of the proletariat from its main enemy, the English capitalists. In imperialist war the capitalist class is driven by necessity to extend the sphere of its exploitation for the very purpose of preserving the system of capitalist exploitation at home. Success of the bourgeoisie in such a war means its success in fastening ever stronger chains on the working class at home. The effort of the English workers to free themselves from capitalist exploitation means also the effort to free their colonial brothers under the heel of the same enemy. The effort of colonial peoples to secure or to maintain national independence is at the same time a blow struck at the enemy of the workers at home, a strengthening of the workers and a weakening of the capitalist exploiters. Thus the best way to help free the colonial peoples under the domination of imperialism, is to strike at the imperialist masters in one’s own country. The Ethiopian people must be defended not only against Italian imperialism, but against English imperialism as well, which intends soon to send in its own troops to seize the Lake Tana region. In short, the fight against imperialism is an international struggle in which each section of the proletariat must fight against its own bourgeoisie.
 



The consequences of the British Labor Party’s collaboration with Churchill are revealed in the recent attitude of that party towards India. The Labor Party leaders have withdrawn support from the Hindu socialist, Krishna Menon, who was for sixteen years a member of parliament for Dundee, always elected on the Labor Party ticket. The Labor Party now withdraws support of his candidacy on the Labor Party ticket because of Menon’s stand on India. He is secretary of the India League of London, an organization that advocates independence for India.
It is always a good thing to have the attitude of the heads of the Labor Party expressed in writing. A letter signed by G.R. Shepherd, on behalf of the National Executive of the British Labor Party, explains the refusal to reindorse Menon as follows: “It is impossible both to support the struggle of the Indian people and be a loyal supporter of the policy of the British Labor Party leadership.” The same letter dares to affirm after this brazen statement: “the Labor Party does not whittle down in any way its own desire for the welfare of India.”
Menon replies to this letter: “My allegiance is to those principles of freedom and social justice basic to, the international socialist movement”. He adds: “The Labor Party policy is now declared by its supreme executive to be opposed to the basic conceptions of self-determination and national independence of subject peoples and at best to be for some form of benevolent and patronizing imperialism.”
Let us state right here that we agree thoroughly with the statement made in the letter of the Labor Party that it is impossible to support both the struggle of the Indian people and the leadership of the Labor Party at one and the same time. To support the struggle of the Indian people, directed against British imperialism, one must oppose the Labor Party Leaders who bolster up that imperialism. Of that there can be not the slightest doubt. The misleaders of British labor are compelled by the logic of their support of and collaboration with the Tory government, to carry on the war of the Tories against the colonial peoples. These peoples are quite properly ready to make use of the plight of their imperialist masters to strike a blow for their own freedom.
 
This Was Macdonald’s Policy Too
But let us not suppose that this attitude on the part of the Labor Party leaders is just a war attitude. Not at all. It is in line with the traditions of Labor Party government in peacetime too. When the Hindus, in their joy that labor had gained a victory and taken over the government under Ramsay Macdonald, felt that they could then act in their own behalf, Macdonald identified himself and his party completely with British imperialism. He used the army against the Indian people and said: “No party in Great Britain will be cowed by threats of force, or by policies designed to bring government to a standstill.”
Not only do we agree that it is impossible to support both the Indian people and the Labor Party leaders. We go further. It is impossible to defend democracy and to support these leaders in the coalition government. Their actions pave the way for fascism in England just as surely as the actions of the social democratic leaders of Germany paved the way for Hitler. If democracy is to survive in England, then the workers alone will be responsible for its survival. They can defend democracy only by repudiating the labor betrayers who sit together with the arch-reactionary Churchill in the Cabinet. They can defend democracy only by setting up their own government.
 
British and India Workers Must Unite
It is absolutely clear that the interests of the working class of England and the interests of the colonial peoples are tied together. Anything which weakens the struggle of the one, weakens the struggle of the other. Both fight a common enemy, the master class, the imperialist ruling class. Therefore if anybody acts for the ruling class against the colonial people, by the same token he acts to strengthen that same class against the exploited workers in the home country. The Labor Party leaders who not only will not aid the Hindus but on the contrary sanction the use of force against them, are by this act aiming a blow at the workers at home whom they supposedly represent. The workers are kept in subjection to their exploiters through the acts of collaboration of their “leaders.”
The British workers believe in democracy at home and abroad. They always supported the demand for self-determination of the colonial peoples, particularly the Hindus. But it is not enough to sympathize with the fight of the colonial peoples for independence. The workers must render active aid to the Hindus. How can this be done? How can British Labor really fight for democracy, first of all in their own bailiwick and in their own “empire”? They can do this only by fighting the force which prevents and suppresses democracy, the capitalist class. The British workers can further the cause of independence at home and abroad by a militant struggle against this reactionary ruling class which no more fights for democracy than any of the dictators do.
But before it is possible for the workers to fight reactionary capitalism, they face the preliminary task of clearing out of their path the rubbish that accumulated from a preceding epoch. This impeding rubbish exists in the form of an opportunist and reactionary labor leadership which helps maintain the yoke of slavery on the necks of the workers. The step to repudiate these misleaders would be the first great step in the struggle for emancipation.
 



The Balkans epitomize better than any other spot on earth the bloody rivalry of the imperialist powers for world domination. Every great war among the powers is bound to involve the Balkans. The First World War exploded at the beginning in the Balkan powder keg. In the Second World War the small Balkan countries were drawn into the maelstrom at the second stage.
In Southeast Europe are the crossroads of the Old World, the bridge from Europe to Asia and Africa- In early history every great invasion of the primitive races swept over the Balkans. The last of these invasions, covering the later middle ages, led to a period of centuries-long domination by the Turks. The growth of the European nations, the triumph of the bourgeoisie in the French Revolution, set in motion forces that gradually undermined the Ottoman Turkish Empire. The modern history of the “cockpit of Europe” began with the disintegration of this Empire.
The European states hovered like vultures over the carcass of European Turkey. All the appetites of conquest were whetted by this Mediterranean decay. For centuries the Balkans remained “unfinished business” for the powers. The Concert of Europe – was there ever a more ironic name? – moved cautiously, each one watchful of the others, while they carved up the slices. The bargaining for mutual grabbing went on in conjunction with the imperialist sharing of spheres of influence in all parts of the world. When the bargaining process was not satisfactory, or where one saw the chance to double-cross the other, war continued the diplomacy and politics of imperialist looting.
The break-up of the Mediterranean Empire went on from within and from without. Nationalities submerged under the yoke of the sultan’s janissaries for untold centuries suddenly stirred into life. The great powers of Europe “sympathized” with these struggling new nations. In the Greek revolt of 1821-1829 the English gave aid as well as sympathy. The romantic aura of Byron’s poetry veiled the real nature of this sympathy, the same kind of sympathy shown by the United States today for the Chinese struggle against Japan, or for India against England. It is the attraction of the imperialist to its prey.
No sooner was the liberation of the Balkan countries from the Turks accomplished, than they fell into the clutches of these self-same European sympathizers. The aid given the small nations in their battle for freedom proved to be the cloak under which they were brought into the orbit of one or the other of the powers. Anybody who today thinks that the problem of the independence of small nations has any primary or independent character or that the questions of national unity in Europe can be settled within capitalist frameworks should be set to studying the history of European diplomacy in connection with the Sick Man of Europe.
Bourgeois writers of history, when they speak unguardedly and therefore frankly, call the Eastern Question “the problem of filling up the vacuum created by the gradual disappearance of the Turkish Empire from Europe.” Here there is no trace of a thought given to the Balkan peoples. The problem concerned not these Balkan inhabitants but the powers of Europe: who was to inherit the pieces of the Empire?
 
Imperialist Rivalries in Balkans
The first great rivals for this inheritance were Czarist Russia and England. Russia wanted Constantinople and an outlet to the Mediterranean Sea. England wouldn’t have minded that – but it already possessed India and could not tolerate having any great power on its lifeline through the Mediterranean to India and the East. The Czar’s seizure of Constantinople would have been merely the preliminary to a later seizure of India.
Each power, while denouncing the Terrible Turk, was most anxious to become his protector. The Czar was the first protector, and gangster-like, exacted his price. In the Crimean War, England muscled in and took over the protection. Russia thereupon played the opposite game, and in 1877-78 sympathized so deeply with the poor Bulgarians that she intervened to help them gain “independence.”
Germany was at first not concerned with the Balkans. Of course, when Austria helped Bismarck in the War of 1870 against France, Bismarck reciprocated and helped Austria seize its share of the Balkans: Bosnia and Herzegovina. But the moment Germany became a united nation, she too cast eyes on the Balkans. Germany became the friend of Turkey in place of the other powers. The great Berlin-to-Baghdad Railroad was projected in order to bring all of Central and Southeastern Europe under German domination. German capitalism was now demanding its “living space.” Bismarck and those after him saw that if Germany was to become the dominant world power, it must first dominate Europe, and particularly the Balkans. Not merely because the Balkans economically complemented Germany’s industrialism, offering an outlet for manufactured goods in exchange for food and raw materials, but also because it would start German expansion into the Eastern Mediterranean. Bismarck agreed with Napoleon who, in order to conquer England, had tried to break its connections with India and the East. Napoleon said: “Really to conquer England we must make ourselves masters of Egypt.”
The first world war was fought around this issue. Who was to dominate the Mediterranean and thus the route to India? For this purpose the Balkans were stepping stones. The Baghdad Railroad was far more a strategic than an economic undertaking.
 
Hitler Carries On
Hitler, carrying out the policies of German imperialism, was inevitably driven to take over this same scheme in the second world war. No doubt Hitler had not banked on so quick a conquest. The ease with which he overran and defeated France placed before him even earlier than he had hoped his next step. He chose the same old Balkan route to Egypt and the Suez Canal for the purpose of breaking the British Empire. This time, due to technological changes, he did not have to wait for a Baghdad Railroad. Mobile transport and tanks have obviated the necessity for railroads in the first stages.
The quick change in aims after the conquest of France is seen in Hitler’s speeches. He threw off the whining mask of Germany’s freedom from the chains of Versailles necessary in the period of rearmament. He became openly imperialist and boasted of the conquests to come.
German economy had of course prepared the way for military conquest. Even before Hitler came to power in Germany, her emissaries in the Near East have pursued the game of power politics, of economic penetration so as to gain a measure of internal control before actual absorption of the country. In this Germany merely followed the other powers.
 
Disunion and Intrigue
If the Balkan countries had been able to unite with each other at any time in an economic and military federation, they might have jointly held off all the imperialists. Many a Balkan statesman, even among the bourgeoisie, has understood and dreamed of this. But the history of the Balkans shows nothing more clearly than the impossibility of the Balkan peoples to live their own lives while capitalist imperialism exists. Imperialism reaches into the very heart of the small countries of Europe. It lays hold of their internal structure, of their financial and banking interests which are tied up with the interests of the bigger bankers of the great powers. Through complete economic domination of the native bourgeoisie, imperialism controls political parties and the governments set up on the basis of these political parties. The only recourse open to the national bourgeoisie is to gravitate from the orbit of one of the powers to that of another. Its bargaining power lies only in the fact that rival imperialists bid against each other for influence.
To prevent any Balkan union, the powers have made clever use of the national hatreds engendered in the course of the centuries of oppression. They could do this because of the class structure of the Balkan states, because of the domination in these states of a combination of feudal and capitalist elements interested solely in maintaining power over their exploited populations. Even the weakest attempts at union were frustrated. In the first Balkan War (1911) the Balkan countries were united against Turkey in the Balkan League. This League threatened Germany’s plans which depended on overrunning at the proper time each small weak nation standing alone. Hence German diplomacy worked successfully to destroy the League by encouraging Greece to seize Macedonia which was mostly Bulgarian in nationality. Serbia was encouraged to turn in the same direction and away from the Adriatic coast which had been promised to Italy in the Triple Alliance. Thus the moment the countries in the Balkan League had gained the victory against Turkey in their war of independence, they promptly turned upon each other and the second Balkan War of 1912–13 took place. Macedonia was the bone of contention, the outlet to the Aegean Sea and to ports like Salonica. In that war Bulgaria was defeated and Greece and Serbia became the oppressors of national minorities.
Germany, the actual instigator of this war and of Bulgaria’s loss, thereupon used this result to bring Bulgaria into the first World War on the side of Germany – by the promise that Germany would right the wrong!
 
After Versailles
The Versailles Treaty redoubled the pace of Balkan intrigue. France, bolstering up the status quo to maintain its artificial domination over Germany and Europe, created the Little Entente of Rumania, Yugoslavia and Czechoslovakia to encircle Germany. All of these states had artificial borders which included minorities torn from other nations. These other nations, created jointly in the process of the Balkanization of Europe after the first World War by the disintegration of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, dreamed of nothing but revision of the oppressive status quo. In the first period, between 1924 and 1932, these nations came under Italian influence, since Italy felt itself the natural successor to Austria in the Balkans. In this period Italy led Hungary and Bulgaria and had considerable influence in Austria.
When the peasant governments of Stambuliski in Bulgaria and Raditch in Yugoslavia tried to get together to settle their differences, Mussolini became greatly alarmed since this threatened Italy’s ambitious schemes. The assassination of Stambuliski by the Macedonian terrorists was in part Mussolini’s work to break up this new alliance. Italy sought to isolate Yugoslavia and to break up the Little Entente so as to get what she wanted later. Part of this same game was the assassination of Barthou and King Alexander by the terrorist hirelings of Italy, the IMRO and the Ustachis. The assassinations were aimed to keep France from cementing a closer alliance and thus putting another obstacle in the way of revision.
The moment Hitler gained power, he took over from Italy leadership of the movement against the Versailles Treaty. The Balkan countries, seeing the future, tried desperately to come to agreements and to unite. But each was powerless to correct the wrongs of the others. When the others refused to right the wrongs done her, Bulgaria stood in the way of union. The Balkan countries are now paying dearly for their own past. If Hitler was able to isolate one country after the other, he merely “inherited” the benefits of all the imperialist intriguing in the Balkans. The Munich Pact, which ended the Little Entente and laid the Balkans open for Hitler’s next step, made his task that much easier.
Imperialist intrigue not only made it impossible for the Balkan countries to unite in any way. It has also made of these countries the most unstable section in the world. Internal stability is unthinkable in small countries where all the complicated lines of imperialist diplomacy cross and recross. The bewildering and rapid changes in governments and ministries that took place, have also, of course, their native reasons. But internal instability is prevented from reaching any kind of equilibrium by the enormous pressures from outside that cannot be withstood.
 
Life in the Balkans
The Balkans are backward peasant countries under the yoke of feudal landlords combined with a small native bourgeoisie. The Balkans account for no more than 2½% of the industrial production of Europe. Most of this is closely connected with agriculture – milling, wine-pressing, manufacture of vegetable oils. The situation of the peasants is not identical in every country, but is enough alike so that it can be easily summarized. The peasants form from 70 to 80% of the various populations. The land, except for Bulgaria, is in the hands of a few great landowners. What the peasants themselves possess is so divided that they live at the lowest level of all Europe. At the same time the agricultural per capita tax is the highest in the world. The mortgage and loan debts of the peasants is enormous. Interest rates for seed and tools run, depending on the country, anywhere from 30 to 80%.
Rumania may be taken as an example. The peasant’s meat consumption per day – of course he does not eat meat every day – is one-third of an ounce, equivalent to a thin slice of ham. He has to work 45 days to pay for a pair of shoes. 40% of the peasant families possess no draft animals at all.
They must drag the plows themselves! More than half the population is illiterate.
The Balkans are the sore spot of Europe. Disease epidemics are common. Pellagra, tuberculosis and dipsomania, leprosy and trachoma are endemic. In this backwardness it is natural to find that Church and State are still one. In Yugoslavia the Greek Orthodox Church of the Serbs was subsidized, and one of the last proposals of the old government was to subsidize the Roman Catholic Church of the Croats. In Yugoslavia out of a population of fifteen million there are one million peasants who possess no land whatsoever and who must work as migratory, seasonal proletarians. In Bulgaria the land is well divided, but in such small parcels that the peasant cannot farm it efficiently. Is there any wonder that the Balkans are the seat of a constant jacquerie, a constant peasant struggle of despair?
 
Balkan Politics
The Balkans are a region of want and famine. Under these circumstances, under class domination, it is readily understandable that the government bureaucracy must exercise the most cruel repressions to keep the mass of the people in subjection, to prevent them from laying hands on food, clothing and the bare necessities of life. Considering the size of the countries, the size of the bureaucracy is extremely disproportionate and frightfully costly, which accounts for the enormous taxes.
The facade of parliamentary democracy in the Balkans before Hitler took over fooled nobody. Balloting took place with a gendarme on each side of the voter to see that he voted right- Behind this facade stood the army and the monarchy. The constant turmoil in the Balkans, since it did not lead to proletarian revolution, led instead to reactionary dictatorship. Nowhere else is the meaning of monarchy as the last resort of reaction so clearly visible as in the Balkans.
The struggle of parties in the various parliaments, each party under a different foreign imperialism, is primarily that between the landed gentry and the capitalist elements, each desiring control of the nation for its own class interests. The native bourgeoisie is weak owing to the fact that what big industry does exist – oil in Rumania, tobacco in Greece, textiles in Yugoslavia – is dominated by foreign capital.
To the left are the peasant parties, parties similar to the Socialist Revolutionaries of the pre-revolutionary period in Russia. On these parties the Russian Revolution had a tremendous impact. The Pan-Slavism that reflected the influence of the Czarist regime on the South Slavs became transformed into Bolshevik influence. The seizure of the land by the Russian peasants gave joy to the Balkan peasants. Thus the left elements of the small proletariat found it possible to exert influence on the peasants and to found communist parties more peasant than proletarian in origin.
The ruling class in the Balkans was driven mad with fear at the outbreak of the Russian Revolution. Everywhere it hastened to try and placate the peasants by talking in terms of agrarian reform and of division of the big landed estates. In fact a certain amount of reform became inevitable. This reflected itself in the coming into power for the first time of the peasant parties. In Bulgaria Stambuliski became the head of the government. This was called the Green Revolution. But the ruling class used this leftist government to give itself time to prepare a counter-stroke. In 1923 it was ready to move. Its plans coincided with those of Mussolini who had hired the IMRO to assassinate Stambuliski. The army under Tsankov promptly seized control, engendering a civil war.
 
Stalinism Betrays the Balkan Masses
What attitude did the Bulgarian Communist Party take? It had a long history and its influence was the greatest in the Balkans. But it failed to understand the situation. The Communist Party stated that it was indifferent to this quarrel between different sections of the bourgeoisie. It stood aside while Tsankov seized power. The latter at once proceeded to suppress in bloody fashion both the peasant party and the workers’ party. Leaders were thrown into prison, many murdered outright. Too late the Bulgarian communists realized what was happening. Too late, after the masses had become discouraged, it staged an uprising. This uprising, intended as a signal for the Germans in 1923, became instead the herald of defeat. Hitler today marches into the Balkans as a result.
It was in the Balkans thereafter that Stalin turned for his peasant allies, like Raditch of Yugoslavia. The Croat Peasant Party of Raditch was the backbone of the so-called Peasant International. But the peasants have no independent policies of their own. They had gravitated towards the proletariat, and in this period Raditch used the Comintern as a red covering to give himself more bargaining power with the bourgeoisie. In 1925 he threw aside the mask and joined a reactionary government under King Alexander. Stalinist policies have been as disastrous in the Balkans as everywhere else. The Balkans presented a number of occasions where a correct policy could have brought about the proletarian revolution supported by the peasants. But Stalin was incapable of directing a revolutionary policy even in Bessarabia, torn from Russia in the period of allied intervention and subjected to the most brutal white terror. Bessarabia had to be won by Stalin, not by a revolution that was perfectly possible, but by a bargain with Hitler that turns sourer every day.
Without the proletarian revolution the Balkan countries can act merely as satellites grouped about the great powers. Their rulers live off the rivalry between these powers. Only the proletarian revolution could bring stability to the Balkans and Europe- The capitalist states of Europe fight now not for their nationality, but to see which of the great powers shall dominate the whole world. Self-determination for small nations is unthinkable while capitalism is dominant in Europe.
In the place of the domination of Europe by an imperialist world power, the workers place on their program the Soviet United States of Europe. Capitalist imperialism poses war as its solution to the Balkan and every other question. The working class poses the social revolution as its solution. But Stalin has long ago discarded the prospect of the Soviet United States of Europe. He thought he could rely on a Balkanized Europe, a whole series of buffer states created by the Allies in the first World War to protect themselves from attack by the defeated nations. Hitler has swept aside these artificial creations, using in the process the very forces of internal corruption and disharmony that should have been made the basis for the success of the proletarian revolution. For the moment, instead of the workers razing the rotten walls between the national states for progressive purposes, Hitler has kicked them down for imperialist purposes.
In his attempt to bolster the status quo, Stalin placed reliance on these same small states with their crumbling boundary walls. Their disappearance gives Stalin less and less possibility for maneuvering. His weak bluff in the Balkans, the warning to Bulgaria, the meaningless pact with Yugoslavia, was promptly called by Hitler. Hitler, to give the devil his due, pursues a persistent policy. He aims to crush England by marching through the Balkans, over Asia Minor and round to Suez. His actions are coordinated for this purpose. If he succeeds he will not only have all Europe at his mercy, but the British Empire will begin to crumble.
 
What’s Ahead?
The Balkan problem of this moment is the problem of the Dardanelles and the Bosporus. Hitler aims at complete domination of this passage-way to Suez. That brings him face to face with Stalin. The latter played the game of power politics in order to maintain his clique in power in Russia. But Hitler played that game infinitely better. All the Stalinist diplomatic successes of the past are turning into their opposites. By his entire policy of sacrificing the historic interests of the proletarian revolution to the momentary interests of his clique, he has undermined and weakened the Soviet Union. Its greatest weapon would have been the ability to evoke stormy waves of revolution among the oppressed workers and peasants the moment any threat existed against the Soviet Union. Instead Stalin alienated both the workers and the peasants. The Balkans yielded to Hitler because their ruling classes were incapable of resisting. Their choice of one side or the other was merely a gamble on the future. Even if beaten now, they hope to be restored later. A real revolutionary resistance was made impossible not by the ruling class, which could not possibly have wanted that, but by Stalin. The peasants of South Europe at first looked to Russia with enthusiasm. But the forced collectivization and the merciless war against the Russian peasants in Russia was not lost on them. They no longer saw their future in Soviet Russia. Only the revived revolution could attract them again.
Will Hitler be able to unite the Balkans under his domination? That is not likely. He cannot, any more than the “democracies,” solve the problem of nationalities. He can merely shuffle the cards anew. Can he put the peasants to work? Hitler cannot alleviate the poverty and oppression of the Balkans. On the contrary he can only add a further and even greater oppression of his own to the burdens already existing. His first efforts everywhere are directed to robbing the countries of occupation for Germany’s sake. But to despoil the Balkans means to bring stark starvation to people who have always lived on its verge.
What then will happen in the Balkans? It is probable that sooner or later a guerrilla warfare, a revival of the Balkan jacquerie, will take place. This can find a healthy basis only if it is combined with the struggle of the proletariat. The IMRO movement (Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization) was a perfect example of the degeneration of a peasant movement which began as a real revolutionary movement but whose leaders, instead of accepting help for the pursuit of their own policies, became willing to take such help and to pursue the policies of the giver of aid. The Comintern tried originally to steer the IMRO movement into proper channels, away from individual terror and into an alliance with the mass movement of the workers. The terrorists fell out among themselves over this policy and murdered each other, Then the movement degenerated completely and became a bandit racket.
But under the conditions of present-day national oppression, the agrarian revolution could be united with the proletarian movement against the foreign oppressor. Clearly the salvation of the Balkans, the ending of social and political instability, can be achieved only through the social revolution under the leadership of the proletariat. Such leadership would set as its aim the. establishing of the Soviet United States of Europe. Hitler has conquered the Balkans, but the Balkan problem remains.



The press has given space to the demand of Villard and the “Keep America Out of War Congress” that the government take over the war industries, including all the heavy industries. Oswald Garrison Villard says he also wants these industries to be run by the government “under democratic control.”
What should our attitude be towards this demand of Villard and the isolationists who hope that by taking the profits out of the war industries they will stop United States entry into the way? To many people it may seem almost obvious that we would support Villard. For don’t we also call for the expropriation of the war industries? And what difference is there between “democratic control” and “workers’ control”?
Villard looks upon the government as something apart from the classes in society, and to him the drive for war is a pressure on the government by special interests which the government finds it difficult to resist. Villard wants to withdraw the pressure and thus free the government to act once more in the “common” interest. By eliminating the profit-making in the war industries, it would no longer pay the individual capitalists to press for war; they will stop pushing the government into war. Such is Villard’s outlook.
Our answer is that the government is the executive committee of the entire capitalist ruling class. That class sees its whole future jeopardized by a redivision of the world not in accord with its basic interests. It is not a question of this or that industry, of profits of one group of capitalists as against those of other groups. What is involved in the imperialist war is the fate of the entire system of profit-making in the United States. Roosevelt speaks in the interests of capitalism as a whole.
 
Roosevelt May ‘’Take Over” Industries
Modern war calls for a tremendous concentration of power over the complete national resources and productive forces. The big bankers and industrialists are not at all averse to having the government exercise this power for war purposes. On the contrary, they call on Roosevelt to extend his power more and more, knowing that through him real control remains in their own hands, that his policies will be the policies of monopoly capitalism. If it were found necessary, Roosevelt would even take over certain industries in order to conduct the war more effectively. Thus in the last war Wilson took over the railroads.
The mere taking over of industries by the government is, therefore, no way to stop war at all. True, the bankers and the big industrialists never like the prospect of seeing the government actually take over and run industry. The reason they dislike to see this happen is because the working class may learn some valuable lessons from this experience as to the ease with which an industry can be run without the employers.
Why do we call on the government, the capitalist government, to expropriate industries and let them be run under workers’ control? Our first aim is to educate the working class concerning the nature of war and its relation to the profit system as a whole. We have no illusions about the capitalist government – but many workers have. Our object is to dissipate these illusions and hence we try to get workers into those forms of struggle which will help them to understand, the real nature of things. The workers are asked to sacrifice their lives in the war for “defense of their country.” At every turn the conditions and circumstances of war permit us to contrast the sacrifices demanded of the masses with the failure to demand sacrifices from the ruling class, particularly in the matter of profit-making.
 
The Aim of Our Slogans
As war becomes more and more burdensome to the masses, they more willingly listen to proposals to ease their lot and not to permit the capitalists to amass wealth at the expense of our very lives. But let the slogan for expropriation of war industries once take hold, and let the workers begin to put up a strong fight to see this accomplished, and the education of the working class speeds up enormously. They would soon learn that the government of the capitalists has no intention whatsoever to squeeze the profits out of war. On the contrary, even where an industry might be nationalized, the first care of the government is to insure the steady flow of profits to the capitalist investors.
The struggle of the workers to force the government to take over certain industries and to permit the workers to have a say in the running of these industries would soon develop into a wide-scale struggle between the two basic classes, the working class and the capitalist class. The government would reveal itself in its true light as the instrument of the ruling class. The, workers, trying to eliminate war-profits and to be in a position to see that this is done, would soon find out that the only way to do this is for the workers themselves to take over the government. Only a workers’ government could really carry carry out a program of taking over and running the war industries and the basic industries in the interests of the great masses.
Villard’s slogan implies a faith in the government as an instrument for the “common good.” Our manner of presenting the issue, on the contrary, is to dispel this illusion and to set the workers in motion on a path which leads to the proletarian revolution. Our slogan teaches that the only democratic control of industry is workers’ control and that the only way this can be achieved is by means of workers’ power over the government.
 



The historic significance of the scene in the second-hand clothing district of London, when the English learned that clothing was to be rationed, probably escaped most people. It was the textile industry that started the British on the road to becoming the workshop of the world. The application of machinery to spinning and weaving enabled the English to drive the hundreds of millions of hand-workers of India and the East out of business.
And now the English cannot supply even their own needs, let alone the needs of the entire world. Even the last war did not see so profound an erosion of English economy and forces of production as to necessitate the cuts in consumption now demanded of the masses. The devastating economic effects of totalitarian war are, in a sense, summed up in the sudden boom in the second-hand clothing market of all the towns of England.
The undermining of the forces of production by modern war is accomplished not alone by the bombing of whole towns and the resulting destruction of machinery and factories. In addition there is literally destruction as a result of the demands on production made by the carrying on of war. The immense flow of materials and wealth into the war machine is possible only at the expense of everyday production, the production of consumers’ goods for civilian needs.
What A Long War Does
The boom in industry that occurs when war starts, the boom in American production that produced a shortage of certain types of labor and that sent several millions of the unemployed back into the factories, tends at first to mask the paradox of war economy, The greater the production for war use, the greater the destruction of the forces of production! That is particularly the case in a long war which this war threatens to become. First of all the government’s demands use up raw materials and decrease the amount of such materials available for ordinary production. Foods, clothing, furniture, paper, leather begin to get scarce. The country starts with great stocks of materials of all kinds. Gradually these stocks in households, in retail stores, in warehouses and in factories, are used up.
They are used up because the raw materials to reproduce them, as would be the case normally, cannot be provided to the factories. Also because production of consumers’ goods is curtailed in order to produce munitions and the sinews of war. The money used by the government to pay for all its needs comes from the savings and capital accumulation made annually by the entire population. Even this not enough, and the government has to eat into the capital structure itself. With the savings used up, there is no money for the normal replacement of the wear and tear of machinery, buildings, etc. Thus the longer a war lasts, the more the machinery of production runs down or erodes.
The English have just been forced to the slaughter of 300,000 cattle because of lack of fodder. Bombed homes cannot be replaced. Not only industrial plants, but the railways and all means of transportation deteriorate. All the capital and wealth previously accumulated in times of peace are devoured in the voracious hopper of war.
 
Inflation Is Part of The Process
The lack of sufficient consumers’ goods, when there is the purchasing power to buy such goods, tends to bring on inflation. In England the cost of living has gone up more than fifty per cent. In Germany too there has been a price inflation whose extent it is difficult to discover, since there are no reliable statistics since 1939. The partial control of prices, or rather the control of the rate of their rise, give some persons the idea that Hitler has managed to get around the laws of capitalist economy. They fail to realize that restriction of prices is not a cure for inflation, but merely lays over or postpones the problem.
What restriction of prices does, when there is a shortage of goods to go round, is to create a hidden form of inflation ready to break out violently at a turn in events, particularly at the end of the war when the government’s purchases stop and when the emergency nature of war economy ceases. Those people, who have purchasing power which they cannot use for the kind of goods they need (clothing, shoes, food) because there is not enough of such goods to go round, will sooner or later use this purchasing power for something else. The pressure of this unused purchasing power to raise prices, if not legally then illegally, becomes enormous. At the end of the emergency, when it can no longer be dammed up, it will be released in a flood. But it will be released, (Keynes or no Keynes) at a time when production has run down to its lowest point and when the least amount of consumers’ goods exist.
Thus behind the scene in the second-hand, clothing mart lurks the terrible menace of inflation. Those who think that the restrictions and controls of war-time can be extended after the war to “manage” inflation, forget one thing. The government can now intervene in many ways because it has mobilized enormous sums of money and with this purchasing power it can exert a considerable degree of control. But once this money is used up, once all the savings of people and the capital accummulations go up in smoke on the battlefield – where will the government turn for new sources of wealth? A bankrupt has little say and little control over the market! We repeat what we have said so many times: a profound economic crisis after the war (if not in the very course of the wr) is absolutely inevitable.
 



When Japan embarked on its China Incident in 1937, it seemed to the imperialist world a foregone conclusion, that China would be forced to capitulate in a brief time. All that Japan would require to conquer was the time to overrun the vast stretches of China. But that was itself recognized to be no mean undertaking. Hence the United States hoped that at least Japanese, imperialism would become exhausted in the victorious struggle. No aid was then offered to China. United States strategy was to allow the two combatants to bleed each other to death.
Two factors changed this strategy of “watchful-waiting,” One was the outbreak of the second World War with Germany and Japan as allies. This brought the threat of a two-ocean clash for the United States in case it entered the struggle on the side of England.
But the second factor was somewhat of an offset to this danger. China refused to acknowledge itself defeated and after four terrible years, Japan was stalemated and bogged down in China.
To avoid flank attack by Japan, the United States saw the chance by lending active aid to Chiang Kai-shek, to counterbalance Hitler’s encouragement to Japan to seize more Pacific loot. China might keep Japan too much occupied for the Mikado’s forces to be very effective elsewhere. Furthermore, if Japan did come into conflict with the United States, then it might be possible to secure bases of operation on the mainland against the island empire. Now Roosevelt is very anxious to keep the Chinese Incident going in a big way.
 
American “Political” Aid to China
The President has appointed all sorts of commissions to act as transmission belts for aid to Chungking. Beside military and technical aid, there is also political “aid.” Owen Lattimore has just been chosen as political adviser to Chiang Kai-shek. He was one of the first to recognize the importance of Chinese resistance to Japan from the point o£ view of American imperialism. In the magazine Asia, he wrote time and again of the mistake being made by the government in, failing to give active support to China. One of his editorials was entitled There Is No Time to Lose to emphasize the extreme importance for keeping Chinese resistance going.
In view of Lattimore’s appointment, it is instructive to quote some of his views on the aims to be pursued by the United States. Lattimore is an “enlightened” spokesman for American imperialism. He realize fully the importance to the United States of the Pacific area, particularly of China, as the Lebensraum for American capitalism. No one is better aware of the contradictions faced by imperialism in the present world conflict. Many American capitalists preferred to reconcile themselves to the swallowing up of China by Japan, rather than to aid defeat Japan. For if China were successful, highly inflammable colonial forces, would be released throughout the entire Far East. The Chinese Revolution, betrayed by Chiang Kai-shek, might very well be revived.
Lattimore sees the need for taking some chances, but at the same time using American aid to good purpose. Here is what he says:
“There are those who fear that a decisive Chinese victory – which undeniably would change the center of gravity of Asia might set in motion a general process of emancipation which would be too tumultuous to handle. The danger is that, for fear of going too fast, we shall go too slowly. For sweeping changes are at hand all over Asia ... They cannot be prevented altogether.”
But Lattimore will do his best to steer things into the right channel. This is both implicit and explicit in all that he says
“It is quite true that we shall not have an easy time with an Asia headed towards emancipation. We shall not have an easy time in any case ... If we are to have chaos in China, then it will be of our own making. For there is no possibility that all China will acquiesce meekly to Japanese imperial conquest. Apart from the fact that this chaos would spread all over Asia, civil war in China would mean, in the end, the triumph of the Chinese communists.”
This was written at the time when Chiang Kai-shek was attacking the Fourth Route Army of the communists, Lattimore was very much alarmed at this blunder of Chiang Kai-shek the moment he received American aid. For Lattimore understood that the communists would gain in influence as a result and that the war against Japan might become a revolutionary war of the workers and peasants supported by the middle class not only against Japan but against, the bourgeois Chinese government.
Nothing could reveal more clearly why Lattimore was chosen as the political “guide” for the Chinese regime than his attitude towards the Chinese revolution. “Our cardinal need there is a united China, carried forward on a current of orderly reforms. There is no need for violent revolution (that is, communist revolution); but unless the current of orderly reform is given a free channel, there will be violent revolution.”
The interpretation of this view is clear. Lattimore proposes that American imperialism help Chiang Kai-shek in building a “democratic” capitalist China.
We venture to say that history will hardly lend itself to Lattimore’s maneuvers for United States imperialism. Even if Chiang Kai-shek is quite willing to become the tool of American capitalism, the Chinese masses will not have learned how to fight Japanese imperialism for the sake, of building a united and free China, only in order to fall under the domination of American imperialism. To conquer China the United States will have to resort to precisely the same methods as Japan – with perhaps the same outcome. For the second imperialist war will not end without colonial revolts, especially in Asia, China will not only undermine the Mikado’s empire, but all the imperialist empires.
 



Hitler’s attack on the Soviet Union tends to restore the situation that existed before 1939. The great fear of Russia at that time was of an attack on two fronts, the Western and the Eastern. The cancellation in blood of the Stalin-Hitler pact serves almost automatically to cancel also the Soviet-Japanese pact. The Japanese militarists are forced to reconsider their position and to decide on a new line that will, in their opinion, best suit their imperialist purposes.
The danger of another treacherous invasion of the Soviet Union, this time in the Far East, is manifest in the whole situation. If the Japanese diplomats and generals maintain complete silence for a time, it will be due to the simple fact that they had not looked for so early a denouement of the fascist plot against Soviet Russia in Europe. They had prepared, following the previous line of Hitler, to turn south. Their immediate attention had become focused on the Dutch East Indies and on Thailand as a first step towards Singapore. This situation had reached more or less of a stalemate owing to Japan’s fear of the Anglo-Dutch-American coalition against her. Nevertheless the desire for the southern adventure had caused a withdrawal of troops and forces from China and Manchukuo. Thus Japan was totally unprepared to exploit the new alignment of forces.
The press continues to carry stories to the effect that Japan will remain neutral in the Russo-German war. It is repeated that Japan will soon take further measures against the French in Thailand in order to press forward towards the great menace of Singapore. But reflection will show that Japan must prepare to face the effects of the new phase of the second World War. Any move southwards would bring inevitably a clash with England and America. It is perfectly clear that the American imperialists do not propose to stand by while the Mikado’s forces extend their conquests still further. The United States sees its entire future at stake in Singapore and will fight any move to infiltrate into the Malay region in a manner that would endanger this great base.
If such a war began, it is clear that it would soon transfer itself to Vladivostok and Siberia. The USSR would be anxious to get all the help possible from the United States through this port. Japan has practically served notice already that she will not permit such help. The Japanese proposal to designate the waters about Vladivostok as a zone of her own paramount interest, not to be used for getting help to Russia, is the first step in the direction of Japanese intervention in the North. The Nipponese militarists fear that the United States will secure a base of operations against Japan not thousands of miles away – as is Singapore – but mere hundreds of miles away. It would not be a big step from all-out aid to Stalin, to an alliance against Japan and Germany. We do not predict such an alliance, but merely state Japan’s fear of one.
 
Japan Preparing to Fight USSR
We may expect, therefore, that Japan will soon begin to transfer her armies back to the north to be prepared for all eventualities. If Hitler gains tremendous victories over Stalin in Europe, the Japanese will be tempted to carry out their original plan of invading Siberia and seizing the Maritime Provinces. In that case Vladivostok will be one of their first goals. But as is often the case, their desire to prevent the United States from getting a toe-hold in Siberia may precipitate just that which the Japanese generals fear. It is most unlikely that Roosevelt will refrain from sending help to Russia through Siberia because of any Japanese threat. His only fear of aiding Stalin now would be that the material sent might fall into German hands in case the Red Army cannot hold out for a long time. At any rate, some measure of help has already started, so that the clash of interests between Japan and the United States will soon find a testing ground in the Far East.
There are many who think that with Hitler’s invasion and the respite given to England as a result, the United States will be held back from entering the war. But actually the new stage of the European war has disturbed the stalemate in the Pacific. Things are once more moving towards a crisis there, owing to Japan’s need to make a sharp turn-about in accord with the move of the Axis partner. The talk of neutrality merely covers intensive preparations for intervention in the near future. That will bring the Pacific war closer.
 
Pacific War Will Begin in Siberia
Once war breaks out in the Pacific it will naturally involve not merely Siberia, but all the imperialist possessions as well. But the first great battles will center in the north, in Siberia. Naturally Stalin would like to see the Japanese remain neutral so as to leave the Siberian rear alone. Soviet Russia could then concentrate on the European enemy. But Stalin must be well aware that the pact with Japan became another one of those scraps of paper the moment Hitler marched his armies across the Russian border. Stalin would prefer (so long as he still exercises any choice in the matter) not to have any capitalist troops on Siberian soil. But if Japan attacks, he will probably not be averse to coming to some agreement with the United States, giving the latter bases on the Siberian mainland for operations against Japan.
Even if Stalin should suffer quick defeat, in which case Japan would act very quickly, the outlook of United States aid to the Siberian forces that remain is not excluded. For despite the extreme importance of the English struggle to United States imperialism, Roosevelt could not afford tb allow the riches of the Pacific area to fall into the clutches of the Japanese without a fight.
 



The capitalist press sees in the restoration of political commissars in the Red Army an ominous sign. We also see in this an ominous sign, but our interpretation is not that of the bourgeoisie.
They interpret Stalin’s move as an indication that there are symptoms of weakening and demoralization which Stalin wishes to check. Stalin does not fully trust some of his officers and wishes to forestall any attempts at betrayal. Hence the dual command, officers plus political commissars.
This interpretation evades the entire history of the Soviet Union under Stalin’s rule. The power usurped by the bureaucracy could be maintained by the Stalinists only through the use of that instrument of terror, the GPU. The political commissars of Stalin form merely one arm of this secret state police.
The origin of political commissars goes back to the period of civil war from 1919 to 1922, after the October Revolution. Faced with the truly Herculean task of building the Red Army from the ground up, the great founder of that Army, Leon Trotsky, saw that it was necessary for the Soviet State to make use of specialists from the old Czarist army. The idea of utilizing these enemies of the working class met with considerable opposition, but was finally adopted. But the Bolsheviks recognized the danger of entrusting their armed forces to generals and colonels of the old regime who might at any moment attempt through treachery to bring about defeat of the Red Army in the interests of capitalist restoration. Hence, side by side with these officers, there were placed the most highly trusted communists who had received some training in leadership in the course of the Revolution.
These commissars had to approve the plan of campaign of the officers, but did not interfere during actual operations in the field. It was recognized that this system was cumbersome, but nothing else was possible at that time. Furthermore the entire system was looked upon as temporary. As soon as officers could be trained from the ranks of the working class, they would take over command of the Red Army, the remnants of the old regime would be replaced, whereupon more or less automatically the cumbersome system of dual command would disappear. And dual command did disappear, from 1922–1935.
 
Stalins’ Removal of the Commissars
The system of political commissar’s was revived just before the Moscow Trials, no longer for the purpose of keeping an eye on enemies of the Soviet, but in order to keep an eye on the enemies of Stalin or those who could not be sufficiently corrupted to become fitting henchmen of Stalin. In short the political commissars became nothing but Stalin’s spies in the army so that Stalin could maintain complete control there as elsewhere. In pursuit of this one aim of establishing his complete dictatorship, Stalin beheaded the army in the great purges of 1936–1938.
The Finnish campaign showed the effects not only of the purges, but of the pernicious spy network which robbed the officers of all initiative. So obvious was this that during the Finnish campaign Stalin was obliged to abolish the political commissars (except for the topmost rung of officers). This was done, as was announced at the time, in the interest of Red Army efficiency. The officers were to be allowed to exercise their real initiative and to take real responsibility on their shoulders.
Why has Stalin restored at this time a vicious institution which can only reintroduce inefficiency at the most critical period in the history if the Soviet Union? The Red Army has surprised the entire world by the strength of its resistance to the seasoned German armies. It has given an excellent account of itself, all things considered. Is it true that certain disloyalties have developed and that Stalin wishes to strengthen the army by restoring the commissars? The capitalist press accepts or pretends to accept this version of the matter. We do not accept it for one moment as the real reason.
The sudden descent on the Soviet Union by Hitler came as a surprise to Stalin. Stalin was prepared to make all the concessions possible to make Hitler’s attack unnecessary – so Stalin thought. Thus, for the time being, the Red Army had to act without any interference from the paralyzed Stalin. But after the first confusion, the Stalinist clique has recovered a little of its composure. It is once more engaged in the attempt (quite vain this time) to assure its future, in victory or defeat.
Stalin feared nothing so much as war. This war has completely negated every “theory” and and every policy of the Soviet dictator. Stalin stands completely responsible for the present situation and its outcome. In the past, Stalin stood in the background and laid all blame for failures or shortcomings on scapegoats. No doubt Stalin would like to employ this method in the present war. The commissars may help him find victims in case things go badly. If this be one reason for the new move, Stalin errs badly. The war will not leave in Stalin’s hands the concentrated power that he once had.
In fact, the feeling that he cannot maneuver with the war and its effects as with previous happenings, is already evident. The army needs immediate life-and-death direction and commands. It cannot now be subjected to the devious rule of Stalin. The ruler feels this and is making another attempt to subordinate the army to his complete control. Once again we see Stalin working, not in the interest of the Soviet Union, but in his own interests. His move will not strengthen the army, but will weaken it. But it is most unlikely that the bureaucratic system can be really restored in a period of warfare when vast armies are locked in battle.
 



Why the Pact Is Now Revived
Why did Hitler feel it necessary to bring out and polish up the Anti-Comintern Pact at this time? Most people considered that pact well buried at the time the Hitler-Stalin Pact was signed in 1939. For that reason Hitler’s bid to be considered as a super-Wrangel at the moment he invaded Russia, failed completely of its purpose. Why the second staging of this poor comedy?
The most obvious reason for its resurrection has to do with the German masses and their attitude towards the war. One of the overhead expenses of dictatorship is that the masses are always taken by surprise by the sudden moves of the Fuehrers. The signing of the pact with Stalin came as such a surprise, but at least it was probably a more or less pleasant surprise in one sense, since it seemed to assure the Germans that at least there would be peace with Russia so that any war might be a short war.
The sudden invasion of the Soviet Union was again a surprise, this time a most unpleasant one, particularly in view of the fact that Germany was still at war with an unbeaten England. The initial surprise has turned into dismay and now into gloom everywhere in Germany as the masses become aware of the terrible and unending losses of men and material deep in the steppes. The renewal of the Anti-Comintern Pact was a weak attempt at keeping up morale as the prospect of the end of the war fades into the dim future. Goebbels and Hitler were trying to reassure the masses that the war might be long but the victory would surely be theirs. See! Hitler was saying to the masses, all these countries sign this pact because they believe, whether they like it or not, that we will win the war.
The German people must have felt little comfort however in seeing the new signatory powers – Finland, Denmark, Slovakia, Rumania, Bulgaria, Croatia and Nanking-China. These weighed little in their minds against the entry of the U.S. on the side of the enemy. The Nazis failed miserably in this first aim, to reassure the Germans and to present them with some concrete fruit of the much-touted “new order” in Europe.
 
Effect on Japan-U.S. Crisis
A second aim was to press Japan back in line and thus disrupt the Washington conference between Hull and Kurusu. But Berlin need not credit itself with the breakdown of the attempt at compromise. That breakdown was due to the fundamental nature of the imperialist conflict. Hitler will be elated at the spread of the war to the Pacific because it will weaken the enemy in the Atlantic. But the Germans masses will get little comfort over the thought that this means the extension and prolongation of the war.
The pact did serve Hitler’s purposes in the case of Finland. This was the Nazi method of forcing Finland to give an unequivocal negative answer to Washington and London in their attempt to have her drop out of the war. It seems likely as a result that England will declare war on Finland, as well as Rumania and Hungary, as demanded by Stalin.
It is possible that Hitler also had in mind what might happen after Litvinov arrived in Washington. He wanted to lay first claim to the Anti-Comintern Pact! For it is not impossible that the Allies will yet sign their own Anti-Comintern Pact. Is seems safe to predict that Litvinov, that League of Nations advocate of democracy, is ready to make concessions on behalf of Stalin looking towards the “democratization” of the Soviet Union – after the war. Stalin seeks in this way to obtain external support for the continuance of his regime, a support that will be lacking completely inside the Soviet Union when the war ends.
Not for nothing did Roosevelt try to persuade the Catholic clergy here that Russia allowed perfect freedom of religious worship. Not for nothing did Hopkins fly to Moscow and come away “thrilled” to give the signal for a complete rehabilitation of the Kremlin dictator in the eyes of the American masses. Davies’ infamous article in the American magazine fits into this same scheme of things. The Allies propose to extract political concessions for their aid, and Stalin is not unwilling.
 
Intervention and Intervention
Democracy – to the capitalists – is something entirely different from proletarian revolution. The Soviet Union – they say – has no business interfering in the affairs of other countries. Stalin has agreed to that, as his speeches clearly indicated. Not only his speeches, but his endorsement of the Atlantic Charter. The Comintern, originally designed for working class intervention wherever the workers needed aid, designed then also as the instrument for rallying proletarian aid for the Soviet Union precisely in a situation such as the present one, must be publicly sacrificed. Since the Comintern under Stalin long ceased to be the instrument for the proletarian revolution, nothing real will be sacrificed by this concession.
The democracies propose in this fashion to make clear to the workers that they have no right to intervene anywhere in the present world situation – as a class. The workers may think it strange that this notice should be served at the very moment when the imperialists of all lands show how necessary it is for them to intervene in every corner of the earth – for their own interests. But there is intervention and intervention. At the least, the present situation is pregnant with political lessons for the workers.
 



Recently the Churchill government gave certain German and Austrian anti-Nazis in England permission to publish a newspaper in German called Die Zeitung. The British socialist weekly Tribune hails this as a great step forward:
“Obviously the establishment of such a paper is the first step to securing unity among the anti-Nazi Germans; obviously it may in time lead to the formation of that body for which half the world, and half Germany, is waiting – the free German legion (the Reichsbanner, if you prefer the name). It may mean that this government has at last realized the need for which the Tribune has ceaselessly clamored – the need for the organization of revolution against Hitler.”
These British socialists are in favor of a violent revolution – in Germany.
The most certain way to prevent any German revolution against Hitler is his way of the British socialists. The organization of that revolution is, according to them, to be the task – of the tory Churchill! For whose benefit would Churchill aid in organizing such a revolution? For the benefit of the German working class? No, only for British imperialism.
These socialist lackeys not only serve their own British imperialism by direct support of Churchill. They serve German imperialism – that is, imperialism in general – by driving the German workers into the arms of Hitler who continually points to the unity of the English workers with the British capitalists against Germany. As if to deliberately give to Hitler a crowning argument, they assign to Churchill the task of bringing about the German revolution.
What example do these socialists offer the German workers, by their own attitude to British capitalism and the English revolution? Their job in the war is to keep the British workers in passive dependence on the bosses, and to hold out illusory promises for the future. Not only must the German workers rely on the Churchill government, but naturally the British workers must do the same. That is the iron logic of the Tribune’s support of the war. The masses, living wretchedly like ancient cave-dwellers, are at best permitted fitful dreams of the peace to come.
 
Pie in The Sky By and By
So the Tribune goes through the motions of preparing to accomplish something – later on! It presents the Laski plan as a solution for the English workers. This plan is a watered-down version of the De Man plan put fprward by the leader of the Belgian socialists before he sold out to the Nazis. Its seven points call in the most ancient reformist style for nationalization of the banks, the railroads, thee mines. It says nothing about the big industries. Above all it says nothing about workers’ control. Whatever is to be nationalized is to be run by the bourgeois government.
The plan is intended hot to set the workers in motion against the capitalists, not to bring about a real revolutionary class struggle for socialism, but on the contrary to head off and divert such a struggle into reformist channels. This is not our interpretation; it is plainly stated. Here is what Laski says:
“If we cannot settle now the lines upon which we meet these problems of peace), we shall be fighting against them after the war – a new and, bitter battle of Privilege against the People. That will mean that all the sacrifices of war will again have been made in vain. Victory will have been made empty and. sterile. In all probability, it will mean a rapid drift here to revolution. We say that this is unnecessary. We say that the government owes it to the people of this country to prevent it. We ask that the Labor Party take the lead now in safeguarding the community against a danger that will never be forgiven its. leaders if they allow it to occur. They know that all Europe waits upon a British lead.”
What is Harold Laski here, but the agent of bourgeois, respectable England in the ranks of the Labor Party. The form of pressure he applies to a supine leadership has as its aim balking the real will of the proletariat. His example to the European proletariat is to be the preservation of parliamentary democracy in post-war England.
 
British Workers Can Lead Way
It is perfectly true that the rest of Europe waits on the actions of the English proletariat. But if the English workers wish to see the German proletariat overthrow Hitler in a revolution, then they can help by setting the example at home. Far from leaving it to Churchill to aid the German revolution, the English proletariat must perform this duty. To do so they must take over the power themselves, they must snatch it out of the hands of the reactionary Churchills. The German revolution waits, in this sense, on the English revolution.
By their policy of unity with the tory government and with the “democratic” imperialists, the English socialists place the greatest obstacle in the path of the German and the European workers. When Laski says that the Labor Party leaders will never be forgiven if they do not help to stave off revolutions, he means that they will never be forgiven by the capitalist class. The workers in any case will never forgive these misleaders, who bound them to the war machine.
Nor will the capitalists be able to do much forgiving in this war or after. For they will be driven to break the “truce” with labor and to rule with an iron fist as soon as the workers come to realize the sheer fakery if the Laskis and the Bevins and the Morrisons. Out of the war can come not a new and better life for the masses, but the most catastrophic worsening of the standards of living. If real barbarism is to be avoided, then the workers must push aside the British socialists and take the power by revolution, not after the war, but at once.
 



The flight of Hess to England has been most revealing in the reactions it called forth on the question of peace.
The “isolationists” gave expression to their views through Senator Wheeler. He at once called on Roosevelt to utilize the occasion of the Hess flight to attempt to bring about a negotiated peace between the two imperialist camps.
Does Wheeler have in mind any particular peace terms?
He dared not be specific, any more than the other capitalist spokesmen. His attitude is revealed, however, in the remark he made to reporters:
“If the President of the United States would follow the wishes of the American people, he would seek to bring about peace. He knows that you cannot force democracy on somebody – that democracy has to come from within.”
This means in so many words: Do not try to eradicate fascism in Germany. Leave Hitler alone. Let him stay in power. Implied in this attitude is the great fear of the reactionaries that any defeat of Hitler, any overthrow of fascism in Germany, can only mean working class revolution. Rather than this, Wheeler prefers a negotiated peace on Hitler’s terms.
 
“Peace” Advocates Want War Against the USSR
More than this. Wheeler – the Daily Worker is quite right on this point – would like to see the “real” war, the war between Germany and Russia. Wheeler jumped at the idea that the Nazis were divided as to their next step; that some, including a Hess faction, wanted Hitler to end the war with England in order to turn on Stalin and begin the imperialist division of Soviet Russia. Wheeler wants Roosevelt to encourage this turn in the war by all means.
Roosevelt has remained silent on the issues raised by the Hess incident. Naturally a negotiated peace at this time, giving Hitler the victory in the war, would be a blow at Roosevelt’s prestige and politics, the politics of “democratic” imperialism. If the war ends in a German victory the position of the United States is weakened internationally. Furthermore everyone recognizes that the greater war for world domination, the war between United States and German imperialism, would not be postponed for very long.
In England it is hardly astonishing with what unanimity the Labor Party members of the Cabinet have spoken out – amidst the pregnant silence of Churchill and the Tories. It is clear that the Laborites were forced to speak out without consulting Churchill. Just think what it would mean to Bevin and Morrison and the other labor lackeys if their participation in the Tory Government ended in a negotiated peace with Hitler! Their betrayal of English labor would be so devastatingly clear that they might very well fear to come face to face with the workers they “represent.”
The mistake of the workers is in thinking that an outright victory for British imperialism would make much difference. So far as the Laborites are concerned a victory too would end the class truce and they would be kicked aside by Churchill!
One thing is clear. The Hess matter has not smoked the imper – ialists of either camp out into declaring any terms of peace. In this the capitalist war-makers show their good class sense. For if they were to state their real aims, which can be nothing but the plundering and looting of the world, the masses of workers would not care to fight for them for a single moment.
But Churchill willing as he might be to come to terms witl Hitler, has to consider the British working class, not the no-account representatives of the Labor Party, but the great masses, who tolerate Churchill only because they think he is fighting against fascism.
The Stalinists naturally sensed immediately the great danger to Russia in a negotiated peace at this time. Far from preparing the working class at home or abroad for such a situation, however, Stalin’s policy has been disastrous for both Russia and the world proletariat. His entire propaganda in all the countries has called for peace. The few hypocritical phrases thrown in about a “democratic, people’s” peace have not half hidden Stalin’s desire to see peace at any price, a negotiated peace, any peace so long as Russia was left alone. The first talk of peace between Britain and Germany, however, has shown that it would in all likelihood mean war on Russia.
 
Neither Their War Nor Their Peace
The issue of peace, as the issue of war, involves the fate of the Soviet Union. It involves also the fate of the working class in the class struggle. That is why every Marxist stands opposed to an imperialist peace just as much as to the imperialist war. An imperialist war means a war carried on by capitalist governments for imperialist aims. If the war started by the capitalist class to accomplish its policies of robbery is ended by that same class, the peace can only be a robber’s peace.
The negotiations between the capitalist representatives of two countries would merely involve the transference from one to the other colonies and markets and loot. If the imperialists are permitted to make the peace, it can only mean a far worse Versailles.
If the British won, then many have already proposed that this time Germany should be treated even worse than last: it would be divided up into small states as in the Middle Ages. If Germany wins then all Europe and more besides will be crushed under the heel of Germany imperialism.
The working class wants a democratic peace, the kind of peace proposed by Lenin and the Bolsheviks when they took power in the first World War. Such a peace would mean no annexations and no indemnities, not in the sense of re-establishing the status quo that existed before the war. That is impossible in any case. But it would mean the real self-determination of all national peoples, in the colonies as well as in the advanced countries.
But the workers cannot make the peace without taking state power into their own hands. It is the ruling class of the nation that makes peace, as well as war. To become the ruling class the workers would have to overthrow the present capitalist ruling class. As Lenin said again and again during the last war:
“One cannot jump out of an imperialist war, one cannot attain a democratic, unoppressive peace without overthrowing the power of capital, without the state power passing to a different class, the proletariat.”
Not the Wheelers, not the Roosevelts, not the Churchills, nor the Bevins and Morrisons who serve the capitalists, can make a democratic peace: Nor can such a peace be brought about by Stalinist propaganda for peace. As Lenin said to the socialist elements who acted in the last war as the Stalinists do in this one: “There is nothing more harmful than phrases like the ‘manifestations of the people’s will to peace’.”
Everybody, including Hitler, says he wants peace. But each of the representatives of national capitalism advances as peace the oppressive conditions of “his” imperialism. The truly democratic socialist slogans for peace can only be made effective by the power of the proletariat; that is, by a series of revolutions in all the advanced countries.
Such a peace would be followed not by the re-division of Germany or of Europe into new states, not by the division of Soviet Russia among the imperialist victors, but in. a Soviet United States of Europe. Soviet Russia must be defended by the workers against the imperialist bandits in both robber-camps, so that later, cleansed of the disease of Stalinism, the Soviet Union can enter into this new Europe. Such an Europe would repudiate all the capitalist debts, freeing the masses to that extent from the bankrupting burdens of the war.
Stalin proposed peace without daring to set forth any program of revolutionary peace. But the revolutionary proletariat which succeeds in taking power first, it does not matter in which of the countries, will at once repeat the terms proposed by Lenin and Trotsky to terminate the first World War. Those terms, proposed by workers, cannot but help to spread the revolution to all the countries of Europe. Only in this way can the workers end the war with a democratic peace.
 



Who is it that struggles for Polish independence? First, there are the former rulers who have set up their government-in-exile under the protection of Churchill in London. Then there are the Social Democrats, particularly the leaders who fled for their lives from Hitler and Stalin. With the latter and outside their ranks we find also many Jews. All these exiles support the cause of English imperialism, which they call the democratic cause, hoping that its victory will bring the restoration of Poland after the war.
Are all these elements fighting for the same cause? Are the Polish generals, the reactionary landed aristocracy, the Social Democrats, the oppressed Jews, all in the same camp? Insofar as all of them support one of the imperialist contenders for world domination, they surely are in the same camp. But so far as their hopes and desires for the future are concerned, they are just as surely poles apart.
In the case of Poland particularly, it is impossible for the forces demanding national liberation to hide the absolutely unbridgable gulf between the social classes. Despite the German treatment of the Poles, despite their common exile and dispersion due to the combined conquest of Hitler and Stalin, these nationalists cannot forget the Poland of yesterday. No talk of national liberation and of unity in this struggle can hide the realities of the class struggle in “united” Poland. Not all this talk can hide the impossibility to achieve democracy under the ruling class, the capitalists and landowners, of poverty-stricken Poland.
The entire history of Poland between two wars is too vivid a memory. The workers and peasants, among them the Jewish workers, cannot forget, for the Polish Junker rule seared itself into their memories. The Polish reactionaries therefore do not even pretend that they have changed in any way, do not even pretend that they propose, if placed again in power, to act differently. Even in London they do not hide their utter contempt for the masses, and above all for the Jews.
 
As Anti-Semitic as the Nazis
The actions of the ruling caste in London have become a scandal for the English. Anti-Semitism in the Polish military forces serving with the English was so intense that ten Jewish military doctors resigned in protest. The Polish National Council, the “parliament”, in exile, proposed recently that after the war all Jews be driven out of Poland and sent to Madagascar. Jestem Polakem, organ of the Polish “National Democrats,” regularly carries on in London the same racial propaganda contained in the Nazi press. The protests of the British liberals and of the English press, particularly the London New Chronicle, have not diverted Churchill in the least from continuing his aid to the Polish generals. In actual fact the British bourgeois press is scandalized not so much by the well-known fact of the anti-Semitism of the Polish ruling class, but by its openness.
All of this places the Jews who support England in the war in an impossibly contradictory position. They cannot pick and choose as to what part of Churchill’s program they support and what part reject. Their one hope – vain hope! – is that Churchill and the other “democratic” imperialists will “reward” them for their support by obtaining concessions for them. Churchill will do this no more for the Polish Jews than he will for the British working class right at home. Churchill fights this war for British capitalism, and for British capitalism alone. The Poland that will get his support now and in the future is capitalist Poland, the ally of British imperialism.
The Social Democrats are in no better position. While speaking for a double goal in their struggle, national and social liberation, they place first the national goal. Their underground press in Poland states that “the main task of the Polish working masses is the re-establishment of the full independence and liberty of Poland,” adding: of course that it must base its existence on the principles of democracy and “social justice.” The past, they say, must never be repeated, nor will they exchange Hitler-slavery for Stalin-slavery.
But just how will support of capitalist England bring about democracy and freedom from slavery? Churchill proposes, if he proposes to do anything at all for Poland, to restore the old Poland, to restore the old Poland and no other.
 
Liberation Can Only Be Socialist
Nowhere is it clearer than in Poland that class society makes real liberation, both national and social, impossible under capitalist rule. Whoever allies himself with Churchill allies himself with the Polish Junkers and fights not for liberation but for a form of slavery only quantitatively and not qualitatively different from that of Hitler. The Polish capitalists use the idea of national independence and national liberation for the purpose of misleading workers into support of their capitalist rule. When they point to the need for “unity” in the struggle against a foreign oppressor, they mean to enlist the masses under theb banner of the rulingbclass. Those who link together the fight for democracy and the fight for a free nation with “democratic” imperialism serve the Polish Junkers and not the masses.
The workers and peasants of Poland will liberate themselves as Poles when they liberate themselves as workers and peasants from the grip of their exploiters. The danger of national enslavement exists for all Europe so long as capitalism exists. Only the overthrow of this system will remove that danger. Then, and only then, can the nations of Europe really achieve unity, the unity of the workers and peasants, the unity of the Socialist United States of Europe. What are the rivalries of the states of Europe today but the rivalries of the capitalist ruling classes, each one desiring to maintain and extend its power to exploit the masses. The masses desire peace and would gladly cooperate the moment the upper class disappears from history.
 



What distinguishes the great Marxists from others in the working class movement? It is above all their fundamental grasp of revolutionary theory. Engels emphasized this essential characteristic of leadership by stating that there were three forms of revolutionary struggle: political, economic and theoretic. But let no one imagine that when Marx and Engels refer to theory, they want workers to set to memory the dry bones of some abstract formulas. That is the view of Marxism that the revisionists and the philistines try to foist on us.
The founders of socialism meant that Marxism is a living science. If this science is to be put to social use then its practitioners must learn to apply correctly all the weapons in its arsenal. Look at any of the classics in Marxist literature and you will find that, without losing sight for one moment of the meaning of the whole situation under dissection, the writer follows every single detail of the movement and shows its inter-connections with all other social elements. It was this meticulous attention to detail that led Trotsky to give such precision to Marx’s theory of permanent revolution. The Marxist is not satisfied till he has thought things through to the very end. It was Marx who taught this method and it is nowhere better illustrated than in his, and Engels’, work on the Revolution of 1848.
The year 1848 marks the dividing line between two distinct stages in the hectic development of capitalism. In the first stage, before that year, the revolutions that took place in Europe were out-and-out bourgeois ones. But the revolution of 1848 marked something entirely new in history: the first appearance of the proletariat as an independent political force in society. That momentous event was itself signalized by the appearance of the Communist Manifesto. It was no accident that Marx, spokesman for the Communist League, issued this message to the workers of the world on the very eve of the revolution. The Manifesto foresaw the revolution and summed up all the social currents of the time. Into its creation had gone all the immense research of Marx, particularly that concerning the relations of the classes in society in and after the French Revolution.
The Revolution of 1789 was national in scope and character, the bourgeoisie assuming the leadership of the oppressed artisans and tradesmen, and of the peasant-serfs. But Marx noted that it took three years for the revolution to gain momentum and for the left petty-bourgeois elements, the Jacobins, to gain control and to lead the movement forward. Finally it was a section of the Jacobins, the Montagnards, the left wing of the democrats, who led the semi-proletarian sansculottes, that destroyed feudalism and opened the road for capitalism. The democratic forces in the city that had grown up out of the guilds were not yet differentiated but contained in embryo the two future classes, the capitalists and the proletarians. That is why the bourgeoisie led a united nation. The so-called extreme elements, like the Hebertists, while they may be looked upon as forerunners of the future, were nevertheless completely Utopian, since the forces of production upon which alone communism could be based, had still to be developed. The French Revolution therefore resulted in the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie supported by the artisans and the peasants.
Marx studied the rhythm of the French Revolution with the utmost care in order to determine not only the general laws of revolution, but also the development of the coming revolution. He noted that the revolution seems to bring into power and then to exhaust various sections of the oppressed classes in turn. This meant the need to study the class structure of society and to analyze the political content of each class. Here Marx noted at once the difference between France and Germany. The Revolution of 1830 had corrected the reaction of 1815 in France; once more the big bourgeoisie had displaced from power the landed aristocracy. Hence in France it would now be a question of the petty bourgeoisie and the workers, for this latter class had become a real force in society with the growth of capitalism. But in Germany the social and political development of the big bourgeoisie was far behind that of both France and England. “Like master, like man.” The workers were handicapped in their development by the same feudal and national atomism that affected the capitalists. In Germany it would be the upper strata of the bourgeois sie that would come to power first.
This section of the capitalist class, the Liberal bourgeoisie, occupied an anomalous position which robbed it of all initiative. When it actually came to power it could not hold its ground against the vanquished feudal elements without the help of the more advanced popular parties. But it was equally afraid of the revolutionary torrent from below that would be needed to sweep away the old trash, for the revolutionary wave would at the same time sweep it away as well. To confine this torrent the Liberal bourgeoisie could rely only on the feudal nobility that it desired to displace. Engels says: “The Liberal bourgeois ministry was only a halting place from which, according to the turn circumstances might take, the cbuntry would either have to go on to the more advanced stage of Unitarian Republicanism, or to relapse into the old clerico-feudal and bureaucratic regime.”
The next class to come to power would be the petty bourgeoisie, in the analysis of Marx and Engels. This conclusion they based on the analogy with the Great French Revolution and also on the events of 1848 in Paris. The Democratic Party of the petty trading and shopkeeping class united the large majority of the working people. “The democratic petty bourgeoisie, which is far from desiring to revolutionize the whole of society for the proletariat, strives for a change in social conditions whereby the present society will be made as bearable and as comfortable as possible for itself.” In political terms this meant the removal of as much taxation as possible and its shift to the shoulders of the landed and the big bourgeoisie, the easing of credits and the lowering of interest rates on loans. It meant the easing of the oppression of the petty bourgeoisie by the finance capitalists but, while bribing the workers by a slight easing of their lot, keeping them where they were.
 
Marx’s Views on Proletarian Policy
It was in the analysis of the strategy that the working class should adopt that the full genius of the founders of Marxism found scope. For here in concentrated form are found the elements of the united front, the independent working class party, the dual power, the soviet, the proletarian military policy, and the permanent revolution. The petty bourgeoisie were well organized all over Germany. Except in a few isolated communities the workers had not yet succeeded in organizing their own forces independently. The Communist League, under the leadership of Marx and Engels, tried to intervene to correct this situation. Its task was at the same time educational and organizational. In the first Address of its Central Committee to the workers it denounces the traitorous role of the big bourgeoisie, but then proceeds to warn that the petty bourgeoisie will act in the same way when it takes power. To frighten the big bourgeoisie into making concessions, the democratic party called itself “socialist” and “red.” All this meant was that when they faced the finance capitalists allied with the feudal elements, the petty bourgeoisie needed the support of the working masses. Once in power they would repeat the performance of the big capitalists.
What should be the attitude of the proletariat and the Communist League towards the petty bourgeoisie? Marx divided the question up into three periods: that in which the lower middle class still suffers suppression; its revolutionary struggle for power; after this struggle when it has assumed power. For Marx had no doubt that this would be a necessary stage of the revolution, as we shall discuss.
“In the case where a struggle against a common enemy exists a special kind of alliance is unnecessary. As soon as it becomes necessary to fight such an enemy directly, the interests of both parties fall together for the moment; and this momentary connection will be established in the future as it has been in the past. It is understood that in the coming bloody conflicts, as in all the previous ones, it will be the workers principally who will, achieve victory by their courage, decisiveness and self-sacrifice ... And then, as soon as victory has been decided, they (the petty bourgeoisie) will endeavor to annex it for themselves. They will call upon the workers to keep the peace and return to their work in order to avoid (so-called) excesses; and then proceed to cut the workers off from the fruits of victory. It does not lie in the power of the workers to prevent the petty bourgeoisie from doing this; but it does lie in their power to make it as difficult as possible for the petty bourgeoisie to use their power against the armed proletariat, and to dictate such conditions to them, that the rule of the bourgeois democrats will beforehand carry within itself the germ of its own destruction, so that their displacement later by the rule of the proletariat will be made considerably easier.”
What policies shall the workers pursue under the rule of the lower middle class?
“While the democratic petty bourgeoisie wishes to bring the revolution to as swift a conclusion as possible... it is in our interest and it is our task to make the revolution permanent until all propertied classes are more or less dispossessed, the governmental power acquired by the proletariat, and the association of proletarians achieved not| only in one country but in all important countries of the world ... With us it cannot be a mere matter of a change in the form of private property, but of destroying it as an institution ; not in hushing up class antagonisms, but of abolishing all classes; not in the improvement of present-day society, but in the foundation of a new society.”
The proletariat, in order at the next stage to carry forward the revolution for these purposes, must set up their own dual power counterposed to the “legal” government.
“They must simultaneously erect their own revolutionary workers’ government hard by the new official government whether it be in the form of executive committees, community councils, workers’ clubs, or workers’ committees, so that the bourgeois democratic government not only will lose its immediate restraint over the workers, but, on the contrary, must at once feel themselves watched over and threatened by an authority behind which stands the mass of the workers. In a word: from the first moment of the victory, and after it, the distrust of the workers must not be directed any more against the conquered reactionary party but against their previous ally, the petty bourgeois democrats who desire to exploit the common victory only for themselves.”
In view of the present building of the Home Guards by the capitalists, it is interesting to note the Marxist military policy:
”Where it is not possible, however, to carry thru this latter objective (namely, preventing the formation of reactionary Citizens’ Guards directed against the workers) the workers must attempt to organize themselves independently as proletarian guards with their own chiefs and a general staff elected by themselves and to place themselves not under the orders of the existing state power, but under the revolutionary community-councils organized through the efforts of the workers.”
Finally Marx stresses in this famous Address to the Workers, the international nature of the revolution:
“Even if the German workers may not be able to attain power and carry through their class interests, then they have the certainty this time that the first act of this approaching revolutionary drama will be simultaneous with the direct victory of their own class; in France and will be very much expedited by it. But they will accomplish the greatest part of their final victory for themselves through self-enlightenment as to their class interests, by taking their own independent party attitude as early as possible, and by not permitting themselves to be fooled as to the necessity for the independent organization of the party of the proletariat by the hypocritical phrases of the democratic petty bourgeoisie. Their battle-cry must always be, ‘The Permanent Revolution!’”
Marx and Engels proved to be over-optimistic concerning the Revolution of 1848. Their analysis was in broad outline perfectly correct. The revolution became aborted in its first stage. They had envisioned the coming to power of the lower middle class supported by the exploited peasants. The majority of these peasants were small freeholders, feudal tenants and agricultural laborers. These were too isolated to act independently, but they could be rallied to the support of the petty bourgeoisie of the towns. The resulting government Marx called the “democratic dictatorship of the bourgeoisie supported by the peasants.” After the revolution had been definitively defeated, Marx went carefully over his analysis and compared it with the actual course of events. He concluded that the petty bourgeoisie could not establish a regime of its own. Once the bourgeoisie had taken power, the next revolution would be that of the proletariat. But the proletariat could not succeed unless it led the oppressed masses of the entire nation, including the peasants. In this sense he wrote in 1856 to Engels: “The whole matter in Germany will depend upon the possibility of supporting the proletarian revolution with a sort of second edition of the peasant war.” This revolution would bring about the democratic dictatorship of the proletariat supported by the peasants.
 
Lenin Applies Marx’s Ideas to Russia
It was Lenin who developed this idea of Marx in relation to Russia. Like Marx Lenin understood the importance of concrete and meticulous analysis of the social forces at every moment. He says: “Marxism demands of us a most exact, an objectively verifiable analysis of the interrelations of classes, and of the concrete peculiarities of each historic moment.” To both Lenin and Trotsky the abortive revolution of 1905 provided a powerful key to such an analysis. The Russia of 1905 had certain points of resemblance to and certain important differences from the Germany of 1848. We do not forget also that the Commune of 1871 had intervened historically. Feudal absolutism prevented the full development of the capitalist class in Russia. They made up for their small numbers by introducing the most advanced form of trustified enterprise from Europe. The proletariat was concentrated in a few big-scale plants. Czarism had been forced by the impact of the Crimean War to free the serfs and a certain development of capitalist agriculture had resulted. This meant that the banks, the factory owners and the landlords were already so intertwined as to be inseparable.
The serfs had been freed, but they did not possess the land, which remained concentrated in a few hands. The seizure of the land by the French peasants had been the greatest force undermining feudal society and aiding the victory of the capitalists. But in Russia this same seizure would have been a blow at both feudalism and rising capitalism. Lenin therefore concluded that the capitalist class could not any longer perform the function it had carried out in the French Revolution. It could not set in motion the forces necessary to undermine feudalism completely and so attain to political power through the democratic revolution.
How then would this revolution come about in Russia? If the capitalists could not achieve their own revolution, who could? Lenin concluded that only the revolutionary proletariat, aided by the peasants, could accomplish the bourgeois-democratic revolution. In Russia the peasants had a party representing their interests, the Social Revolutionists. Marx had been of the opinion originally, as we saw, that the petty bourgeoisie would set up a regime of their own prior to the taking of power by the proletariat. Lenin established the fact that the proletariat would have to take the power next in Russia. But what would their relations be with the peasants? Lenin did not exclude the possibility that the new regime would first consist of a coalition of two parties, that of the proletariat and that of the peasants. He therefore adopted the formulation of Marx, the democratic dictatorship of the proletariat and the peasants. In the actual course of the Revolution of 1917 Lenin found that he had to modify this formulation in favor of that of Trotsky. The democratic dictatorship of the proletariat and the peasantry, in Lenin’s terms, existed, if at all, in the unstable period of dual power which existed before the Soviets, guided by the Bolsheviks, took power.
The interrelationship of classes represented by Lenin’s earlier formula existed in the Soviets while they were still under Menshevik control. The revolutionary force of the peasantry was there represented by the petty bourgeois leaders; side by side with them sat the working class representatives. But actually the workers represented more truly the revolutionary interests of the peasants, for they had adopted the complete program of the peasants and were urging them to seize the land. Whereas the Mensheviks and Social Revolutionists had turned to support of the bourgeois provisional government which refused to carry out the demands of the peasants. Lenin called this a unique and unforeseen development. In April 1917 he found it necessary to attack those who were still adhering to his old formulation when the entire situation demanded something new.
“He who now speaks of ‘revolutionary-democratic dictatorship of the proletariat and peasantry’ only, is behind the times, is therefore in practice on the side of the petty bourgeoisie and against the proletarian class struggle; such a one should be placed in the archive of ‘Bolshevik’ pre-revolutionary antiques (it may be called the archive of ‘Old Bolsheviks’).”
The class collaboration of the bourgeoisie and the peasant leaders caused Lenin to adopt the formulation: dictatorship of the proletariat supported by the peasants. This was the formulation which had earlier been reached by Trotsky after the Revolution of 1905.
 
Trotsky Expands Lenin’s Analysis
Trotsky, like Lenin, had concluded that the capitalistsi could not play a progressive revolutionary role in Russia. The working class would have to abolish feudalism and the Czar. In this task they would be aided by the peasants. Like Lenin.Trotsky correctly estimated the tremendous revolutionary reservoir residing in the peasantry. But Marx and Engels had stressed the inability of the scattered peasants to coalesce and form a revolutionary political force of their own. Trotsky too concluded that the peasants could not form a strong party capable of carrying through their aims. Only the working class could carry through the aims of the oppressed peasants, as of all the oppressed. If the future revolution was to succeed, it must be therefore in the form of the dictatorship of the proletariat supported by the peasants. And in actuality that is how events developed; that was the essence of the October Revolution.
But Trotsky did not stop there. The working class would take the power and would then carry out the democratic revolution which the bourgeoisie was incapable of doing. But would the proletariat, after accomplishing this task, hand the power back to the capitalists? The difference between Bolshevism and Menshevism would have then reduced itself to a matter of tactics. The Mensheviks believed that the democratic revolution was the affair of the bourgeoisie. The workers and peasants should place themselves under the leadership of that class in order not only to overthrow Czarism, but to permit the bourgeoisie to set up its own democratic, parliamentary regime. In this regime the workers would play the part of the loyal opposition as in Western Europe. The Bolsheviks knew that the capitalists could not lead the revolution, – but what about after the revolution? Trotsky answered: no, the workers would never yield the power that it had taken during the revolution to its arch-enemy! It would use that power, once it carried through the democratic reforms, to begin to carry out its own tasks, socialist tasks. The democratic revolution would thus merge or be combined with the socialist revolution. This was the essence of the theory of permanent revolution. Lenin and Trotsky both understood that the socialist revolution could not be accomplished in a single country, above all in a backward country like Russia. Both appraised the Russian Revolution as the first step in the world socialist revolution. But Trotsky formulated in this precise fashion the Marxist theory of permanent revolution, whereby the proletariat in Russia would turn to socialist tasks and would simultaneously use the first proletarian conquest to spread the working class revolution to all other countries.
The theory of permanent revolution derives, as we have seen, from Marx’s analysis of the Revolution of 1848. Trotsky from his study of the Marxist analysis in the light of all the experience up to his time, concluded that not only in semi-feudal Russia was the bourgeoisie incapable of any further progressive policies, but that nowhere at all could capitalism or the capitalist class play any further progressive role. His analysis held not only for Europe, and for the advanced powers, but for the colonial countries as well. Colonial and semi-colonial countries are under the sway not of native capitalism but of foreign imperialism. The native capitalists are merely the agents, in one form or another, of foreign imperialism. Thus the bourgeoisie in colonial countries cannot under any circumstances in the age of imperialism play an independent part in politics. It can only gravitate from one imperialist master to another. When a Chiang Kai-shek is rejected by Japan, he can only turn to the United States. Trotsky concluded therefore that even in the most backward countries oppression could only be ended by the proletariat, weak as they might be, supported by the peasants and the oppressed masses.
The year 1848, we see, marks a turning point of world significance. We can say that once the proletariat had appeared on the scene as an independent force, making its own demands, the bourgeoisie immediately lost its progressive possibilities from a political point of view. This is reflected in all history since then. In all previous bourgeois revolutions, including 1848 when the bourgeoisie received a shock from the proletariat, one of the first slogans had been the demand for the arming of the people. But 1848 taught the bourgeoisie that the national militia included the working class which refused any longer to follow in the leading strings of capitalism. In 1905 the Russian bourgeoisie learned this lesson anew. Hence the capitalists want least of all to put arms in the hands of the workers. That is why they fear war. The most delicate moment for imperialist countries is the moment of peace, when it becomes the ticklish duty of the government to disarm the soldiers before turning them out. This is a task of major strategy.
Need we refer to the actions of Azaña in the Spanish Revolution, of the French General Staff in its capitulation to Hitler? In 1914 Miliukov, as we know, said that if to defeat Germany and win a victory, it would be necessary to have a revolution, he was not interested in the victory! Nothing could sum up better the role and position of capitalism in our epoch. It is reactionary through and through. The Permanent Proletarian Revolution will sweep it away!
 



Data keeps accumulating to lend complete certainty to the fact that there will be a tremendous economic crack-up at the end of the war. The bankers and the economists know full well how artificial is the American war prosperity. They see one contradiction piling on the other to make impossible the gradual and controlled readjustment of national economy after peace comes.
Glance first of all at the war trade which has created the “boom” period. The figures are in for 1940. The volume of exports for last year was the highest since 1929. It amounted to over four billion dollars (in 1929 the total was over five billions). Of this sum 64% was in trade with the British Empire. And the principal export, the first time in all history, consisted of airplanes and airplane parts. In addition there was machinery, tanks and munitions. In other words the bulk of the export trade was due to the heavy industries.
 
Farmers Still Take a Beating
But while the heavy industries have been building up, what is happening to United States agriculture? Exports of farm products declined one hundred forty million dollars from 1939 to 1940, and the decline is continuing. Normally this country exports more than half its cotton, 40% of its tobacco, a quarter of its wheat. But the foreign markets for these commodities are gone. The government is paying to have the tobacco growers cut their crop right in half for the next three years. Japan normally imports about a million and a half bales of cotton and this provides employment for 350,000 Southerners who support through this work another million and a half dependents. But Japan no longer buys from this country or at least is cutting its share down all the time. The story is the same for wheat. No wonder it is remarked that the war means the ruin of the farmers! To prevent that the government is merely increasing the warehouse surpluses in this ever abnormal granary.
Naturally the durable goods export will drop like a shot if hostilities should cease soon. True enough, the United States will continue to absorb much of the material for its own armament program, but that also merely postpones the day of reckoning. The arms program itself involves the amassing of a tremendous amount of fixed capital for expanding production. And it was precisely to the different rhythm in which fixed capital is realized in the process of capitalist circulation, as against the other forms of capital, that Marx traced the cyclical crises with the result of bringing starvation in the midst of plenty. The greater the weight of this type of production in the national economy, the more deep-going the later crisis will be.
 
The Paradox of Foreign Trade
But the most ironic contradiction is shown in the balance of foreign trade. In 1940 the United States, with the greatest hoard of gold the world has ever seen, imported only a little more than two and a half billion dollars worth of goods. Thus the rest of the world owes America money, and keeps owing more all the time. Unless the other countries can pay either in goods or in gold, they must borrow. The United States can sell its products abroad only so long as it lends others the money with which to buy. And this is precisely what it is doing with Latin America. But this serves at long last to disrupt international trade.
Meantime the flow of gold into this country from the rest of the world piles up extra reserves in the Federal Reserve Banks. These reserves are a great potential danger for bringing on inflation. With the rapid expansion of business, they tend to spill over into the stream of circulation and credit and form a veritable flood. The government would like to take measures to cut down these reserves, but such measures might slow up the arms program, slow up the expansion of production and thus prevent any further absorption of the unemployed.
Thus the government is forced to pursue a policy of gamble in regard to inflation. It hopes to control the process and have only a mild inflation by trying to fix prices and wages. This requires the most drastic measures if it is even partially to become effective. Even in Germany where such measures could be taken far more readily than here, the control was not as effective as the Nazis would have us believe.
Naturally it is, not only the United States that is faced with all these capitalist contradictions. The entire system of capitalist world economy is faced with deficit spending which can never possibly be repaid. The war is leading all the nations to economic bankruptcy at high speed.
 
Either Socialism or Chaos
There are those who think that fascism is building a new kind of society, that it is learning to control the entire economic process and to avoid inflation by drastic control of the entire price structure. These people do not understand that no single country, nor group of countries, can control world economy which alone is decisive in the end, even were we to assume that any national economy could actually be “planned” while private property still existed. Planning cannot be done completely even where private property has been abolished, as in Russia, where, planning is circumscribed by the capitalist world. Unless the working class learns that only its abolition of private property can stave off ruin and steer civilization to a new plane of development, then the class struggle will end in common ruin. As the Communist Manifesto puts it: “a warfare that invariably ended, either in a revolutionary change in the whole structure of society, or else in the common ruin of the contending classes.”
 



On the eve of the war, Stalin and Blum, the Comintern and the Second International, were in a “People’s Front,” with each other and with the “democratic” bourgeoisie. In line with the Franco-Soviet pact, Stalin had placed the Third International at the service of Anglo-French imperialism. The Second International was already in that service.
However, Stalin suddenly switched at the very outbreak of the Second World War, assumed a position of “neutrality” and withdrew the Comintern from its support of “democratic” as against “fascist” imperialism. Relying on the proverbial shortness of memory of mankind, Stalin tried to lay the entire blame for war-mongering on the Second International and virtuously broke collaboration with it.
But if the war-mongering of the Second International and the actual development of the war gave that already bankrupt organization the final coup de grace, the cynical and perfidious actions of Stalin alienated the entire world proletariat from the Soviet Union. This is particularly true of the European workers who suffer directly the full consequences of the victories of Hitler.
More than ever before, Stalin needs working class forces outside the Soviet Union which he can use for his foreign diplomacy as pawns in the game of bargaining: With each fascist victory the isolation of the Soviet Union grows more menacing to its existence, Stalin would like to be able to scare Hitler by means of the working class of Europe, so as to prevent his turning on Russia. But bluff alone will not do in this game. The sudden appearance of the German Communist Youth manifesto in the Swedish Communist, organ, calling for the transformation of the imperialist war into a civil war in Germany, was intended not so much for bluffing Hitler, as for fooling the working class. Stalin thinks he can once more rally the revolutionary workers under his banner with this bait.
Stalin’s New Line in France
In France, the Stalinists have started systematic propaganda to win over the social democratic workers. How is this to be done under the chaotic conditions and the military rule of Hitler? Why, by the revival of the old Third Period policy of the united front – from below! The Communist International for October 1940 tells us:
“The bolts that kept the masses riveted to the, bourgeois regime (that is, the Social Democratic parties) have been broken and the social democratic masses are now so situated that the question of what is to be done becomes ever more urgent with them ... At this point the Communists in a comradely way address their Social Democratic class brothers to tell them that there is only one way out of the situation to which their leaders have brought them – the formation of a united front from below.”
What is the purpose of this move? It has two purposes, both related to each other. In France the bourgeois regime lies, in ruins. Only the forces of Hitler prevent its complete collapse. Only the German military dictatorship, and not that of the senile Petain, keeps the workers in check. What will happen later? A real revolution would be as menacing to Stalin as to Hitler. Stalin would like to be able to control any movement among the workers so as to steer it in accordance with his own reactionary interests, Above all he is afraid, and with the best of cause, that the French workers will be polarized around the Fourth International. Hence he will use the entire resources of the powerful Soviet bureaucracy to gain control of the French movement.
What would Stalin do with such control if once it could be achieved? His real purpose would be to demonstrate his usefulness to the bourgeoisie. and to Hitler once more. But if worst comes to worst and he must play a last card, then Stalin would not be averse to an adventure in France to divert attention away from Russia, or to force the imperialists to make peace and to leave Russia alone. We are told in another article in the Communist International that social democracy “wants to force the masses to accept but one alternative, the victory of either one or the other imperialism, as if the world contained only imperialists and not also peoples, hundreds of millions of human beings, that can rise up in arms to put an end to the war in their own way and in their own interests,”
The Stalinists cry everywhere “Stop the War!” The Russian proletariat and the peasants stopped the last war by resorting to revolution. Short of revolution there can be no such thing as a “people’s” peace for which the Stalinists clamor. In reality they want a negotiated peace on any terms so that the war will stop – or so they hope – before Russia is dragged into it. Whoever takes seriously the idea that the Stalinists could or would prepare the working class for revolution, or could or would lead a really revolutionary struggle against imperialism, has learned nothing from the terrible defeats brought on the workers by Stalinism. But that Stalin, as a last desperate measure might try an adventure against Hitler – that is not only not excluded, but is a distinct possibility.
 



The war economy of fascism has hypnotized many non-Marxists with the idea that German fascism has built a new lurid of social system. These people give Hitler credit for miraculous powers, including the ability to completely control wages, prices, production – and even crises! Dwight MacDonald even calls fascist war economy planning for use!
Hitler was fortunate in coming to power just as the economic cycle of world capitalism was turning upwards. His political victory over the disunited workers permitted the capitalist class to stabilize their economy and to re-establish profits at the direct expense of the wages and living standards of the workers. Hitler “fixed” wages at their lowest level attained during the crisis, and then attempted (without complete success) to keep them there.
He then turned immediately to the rearmament of Germany and to preparations for war. This not only “solved” the unemployment problem by absorbing seven million unemployed, but soon created a shortage of labor. The tremendous speed of rearmament was rendered possible by the complete domination of monopoly capitalism and the utter impotence of the working class.
Forgotten was all Hitler’s tommyrot about women staying at home. Women young and old flocked into the factories. Today there are seven million in factories and offices, not counting those giving forced labor on the farms. A million workers were taken from the farms between 1932 and 1937. This actually resulted in a decline in agricultural output in the latter year. Even handicraftsmen were farced into the factories. As the fascist press felicitously put it: “The handicraftsman must be forcibly led to his happiness.”
 
“Controlling” Wages And Prices
The wage schemes of monopoly capitalism soon struck a snag in the war economy. Such an economy (in the United States, England, or Germany) demands reduced investments in new capital, the depletion of existing capital in order to supply the vast funds needed by the government from savings and capitalist surplus, and also reduced personal consumption. Carried too far, personal consumption comes into conflict with war’s demand for increased production. However, when labor productivity declined under the terrible strain in Germany, the bosses were forced to raise wages, especially in the speeded-up war industries. Theft the competition for labor, especially skilled labor, nullified all the laws and agreements. Wages had to be bid: up to secure labor – and to prevent slowdowns!
Nazi price control is no different from that of England or of the United States, except that here it is starting later. The boards set up for “planning” and for price control are the same as here. Here Stettinius, Knudsen and Henderson sit with the generals. There Krupp, Schroeder and their confrères not only sit with the generals but have themselves been given the glittering uniforms of generals and named “leaders” of their own monopolist enterprises. Prices are set in the usual manner in which monopoly capitalism sets prices. It would require more than this column to quote the complaints and exposures in the Nazi press itself regarding the methods of price evasion, rendered easy by the private control of production and distribution.
Fascist “Planning” Equals Anarchy
How about “planning”? Marx long ago pointed out the distinction between the ordered planning inside the factory under capitalism – and the resulting anarchy of production in society. Planning for use means planning for the whole of society so as to meet all the needs of people and raise their living standards. In fascist Germany, production by monopoly capitalism for war breeds admittedly increasing misery of the masses. German economy is being wrenched for the purposes of war. The same thing is occurring in England, and will occur here.
In 1935 the share of capital goods to consumers goods in Germany was 55% as against 45%. In 1938 it was 62% as against 38%. In the ten years between 1928 and 1938 total income went up 26%. But the production of consumers goods dropped one-third! The awful fear of inflation inherent in these figures, the vision of another 1923, drove Secretary of State Brinkmann out of his mind six weeks after taking the place of Schacht.
 
Hitler’s ‘New Order’ Lives By Looting
Hitler has gambled on being able to solve this anarchy of German capitalist economy by robbing the peoples of Europe. Are farm laborers needed in Germany? Then send millions of conquered peoples and soldiers there as slaves. Does Germany. need to replace its badly worn machinery? Then dismantle the factories of the rest of Europe and send the machines to Germany. Are consumer goods needed by the German masses? Then take them away from the inferior races and let them starve! This is the “planning” of fascist capitalism that requires the looting of all Europe to attempt to make good its own anarchy.
So long as the state continues to give orders to German factories, so long as war industry expands, the capitalists need not worry about markets for their goods. But the distorting of German economy in the process, and the mounting of the state debt means not only bankruptcy but a tremendous economic explosion in the future.
 



British Export and the Lease-Lend Act
The Lease-Lend Act has been quite useful to American business in more ways than one. The English manufacturers and exporters do not accept it as an entirely unmixed blessing for this very reason. The finished products of British make which require steel or metals or other materials that are being shipped to England by the United States, bear no sign which labels them as made of strictly English resources. American business used this simple fact to exert pressure on England to stop exports for the duration of the war ...
This export policy change has been far from palatable to English exporters. The English government set up a special Export Council at the beginning of 1940 before the passage by Congress of the Lease-Lend Bill. This board was created to encourage export in every possible way, since this was the only way by which England could mobilize foreign exchange with which to pay for its tremendous imports of war materials. But Churchill was forced to yield to American pressure and the board has become a mere ornament, designed to maintain a kind of “token” export so as to keep in touch with the foreign markets.
British business has not failed to recognize the implications of the export situation. A great debate has been earned on in the press and in the English journals over this issue. The wording of some of the articles on the subject has been quite cautious, as the writer’s did not dare to make a frontal attack on the United States in view of British dependence on her fellow-democrat. But it is not difficult to read between the lines and see the real fear of future subservience to the American colossus. The sub-title of one article of discussion is, in fact: Must Victory Be Bought at Cost of Economic Subservience?
 
They Have ‘Two Enemies to Fight’
Under this title we find the following remarks: “To the oft-repeated statement that we must win the war first, we must say that defeating Germany is not all that is meant by the phrase ‘winning the war’. We must also defeat Germany’s object, which is to destroy the British Commonwealth of Nations. We have two enemies to fight – Germany and destitution. After beating German arms, must we face defeat, by an equally destructive enemy, accompanied by German derision, namely, economic subversion?”
German derision has indeed been aimed straight along at the fact that England is becoming the forty-ninth state of the United States. It is clear, from the very nature of the discussion – the suppression of major exporting for the duration of the war – that it is the chafing of British capitalism under the yoke of its new taskmaster, the United States. The English fear that they will not be able to recover the markets which they are forced by their kindly ally to give up for the time being. But there is nothing for it but to endure American aid for the present. The stage of revolt is hardly practical at this juncture.
Nor is the field of exports the only one eyed with utter mistrust by the realistic Britisher. He can feel nothing but misgiving at the influence exerted by this country inside the British Empire. He notes that Australia and New Zealand have indicated a certain independence by sending their own ministers to Washington. In the negotiations being carried on with Japan, Secretary Hull has met hot only with Halifax to keep this Ambassador informed, but with Casey of Australia as well.
 
What Will Happen to Canada?
Then there is Canada to which the United States pledged military aid the very first thing. The setting up of a joint defense board of the Ogdensburg Conference meant the bringing of Canada all the more closely into the orbit of United States imperialism. The English conservative magazine, Round Table, comments on this situation in the most frank manner imaginable:
“It is a common observation that Canada is steadily becoming more North American ... Canada’s continuance in the British connection (that is, in the British Empire) may therefore depend on the capacity of British statesmen to build a new Europe with a reasonable chance of peace ahead of it.”
This magazine sees the tight spot in which the Empire finds itself. Everything depends on the further course of the war, of course.
“A very long war into which the United States eventually entered and which caused it to put forth every ounce of its strength, might well burn out American isolationism entirely, but it would almost certainly replace it with Imperialism. Any peace that would follow such a war would be an American peace, with Great Britain influential, but far from dominant. The way would then, as has been hinted above, be open for a new English-speaking synthesis about the Republic.”
This conservative organ is under no illusion about “Union Now” or any kind of federation of the Republic and the Empire on a world scale. It recognizes cold-bloodedly that such a federation would in actuality be nothing but the domination of the empire by American imperialism. The war threatens to become precisely the kind of war feared by the British; namely, a long war in which victory by the allies can be achieved only by the actual entry of the United States with the sending of another AEF wherever necessary in the world to defeat the Axis. Already writers envision the first American force being sent to the Near East to help England meet the threat to its lifeline through the Mediterranean; The British are quite right. The peace after such a war will be a peace imposed on the world by American imperialism. Unless, of course, the working class of the world says its word about the whole matter.
 



The Crisis After the War
Just in case the admirers of fascist economy failed to note it, we call their attention to an article in the New York Times of October 22 concerning that economy. It quotes the president of the Adam Opel Co. (the General Motors of Germany), Dr. Carl Luer, in an address made by him to the Frankfort-on-the-Main Chamber of Commerce, dealing with the tasks that would face German industry after the war.
The importance of the article lies not in its confirmation of what we have previously pointed out concerning the effect of the war in distorting German economy. It is not German economy alone that is being systematically undermined by the war, but all capitalist economy in all countries. The war is consuming so tremendous a portion of the wealth of society that the ordinary forces of production are depleted and must be allowed to run down. Dr. Leur estimates (it is by far too conservative an estimate) that the accumulated value of replacements and repairs to machinery and other industrial equipment that must be postponed till after the war amounts to five billion marks a year. The Nazi leader adds soberly that this yearly sum has a tendency to rise in a geometrical progression as more of the machinery of production wears out.
This will be the first task of the German industrialists after the war – the rebuilding of the industrial apparatus. But Luer does not tell us where the wealth will come from that is necessary to this process of rebuilding. Naturally the German capitalists rely on Hitler to loot all of Europe and all of the colonies he can seize from the other imperialists for the purpose. Meantime the German masses, who have learned to do without so many things in their daily lives, will have to continue doing without for a number of years even after the war. For priority will have to be given to the industrial apparatus before any attention is given to consumers’ goods. In short, the masses will have to pay for the war long after in a terribly lowered standard of living.
 
Marxist Analysis Confirmed
This item of news thereby confirms completely what Marxists have been repeating for many years. Far from solving any problems of society, the war merely drags civilization further towards the abyss. The same thing that is happening in Germany is taking place in England and in the United States.
The war is storing up a tremendous crisis, more terrible even than any previous one. Ironically enough, the war creates a situation where in some sectors of economy unmanageable surpluses come into existence already. This is particularly true of those countries that produce agricultural products for export. Thus by 1942 there will be a surplus of a billion and a half bushels of wheat in the four great wheat countries (United States, Canada, Argentine and Australia). This is a full year’s crop, and a bumper one at that. Similarly with cotton, sugar and coffee. Brazil, “normally” burning more than a third of its coffee production, Will be forced to burn even more each year. The disturbance in international trade due to war conditions, makes for an immediate crisis the moment the war stops.
The stored-up agricultural surpluses will be face to face with a prostrate international market. This market will not contain sufficient industrial goods to exchange for the foods needed by the manufacturing countries. On top of all this there will be piled the monetary crisis, with currencies inflated and undermined. The Nazis, who were credited by some with the magical power to control economy and avoid serious inflation, show the greatest fear of the inflation that already exists. They are completely unable to control the “free” market that exists behind the “legal” one. The shortage of goods and the existence of unsatisfied buying power cannot be controlled indefinitely, even during war-time. The end of the war will bring with it the bursting of the dam of inflation.
 
Economic Crisis for Imperialists
Need we add anything concerning the immediate unemployment due to the stoppage of the war industries boom? Capitalism is totally incapable of regulating its dislocations. It cannot plan any gradual correction of war industry to peace-time production. The demobilization of the vast armed forces will in and of itself bring on a crisis of the economy. To keep these armed forces in being, even for the victor (the vanquished will be forced to demobilize at once), will mean further tremendous outlays of money and wealth. But demobilization with some sort of dole for the period of rehabilitation will also mean a great drain on the national treasury.
The national debt will not cease mounting after the war. That debt will represent the wealth not merely of many individuals who hold public bonds and securities, but also the wealth of all the large banks and corporations forced to subscribe during the war to protect their system of exploitation. In Germany every corporation has large sums invested in the government loans and securities. It is obvious that these can never be fully repaid, if they can be repaid at all. National bankruptcy must inevitably add to the process of inflation.
It is an illusion to think that the victorious imperialist camp can escape this whole crisis by unloading it on the backs of the defeated enemy. Germany is already finding it difficult to squeeze more loot out of the occupied countries. Her demands have been so urgent that she has impoverished the whole of Europe. There is no more loot to be had in the same quantities as when Germany seized Holland, Belgium, Denmark, Norway, France, etc. The economic crisis will affect both the winners and the losers of the war. That is the dark picture that faces the masses – if capitalism continues to rule after the war.
 



Lyons States the Capitalist Position
Eugene Lyons, whose career was “made” by breaking with the Stalinists at just the right moment, gives, some plain capitalist talk about Russia in the American Mercury. What he says is of interest in the light of the policies pursued by the Stalinists, policies which cover up precisely what the Lyonses take correctly to be obvious. The Stalinists do their best to make the Soviet Union appear indistinguishable from the democracies, to gloss over the tremendous gulf between the Allied states and the USSR. But Lyons sees with approval the real attitude of the capitalists, their hatred of the first workers’ state. While the Stalinists distinguish between the Churchills, the Roosevelts and their underlings like Beaverbrook, Lord Halifax and Co., the Lyonses have no such illusions.
“It is unfashionable to admit the obvious fact that Great Britain and the United States are offering material aid to Russia at this juncture for their own and not for Russia’s sake ... Moreover only political morons could contemplate without goosepimples the possibility of the Red forces actually licking Hitler’s hordes, pursuing the advantage westward to the Atlantic and displacing the Brown scourge with their own brand. Britain and America are helping Russia – and should do so, we believe, to the utmost extent – for the sole reason that an eastern front engages and saps German military strength. They do so without any fear of a Red tidal wave overwhelming Europe – because they know that a decisive Russian victory is not even a remote possibility. The most that can be hoped for is the maintenance of a permanent Russian front until a victory over Hitler is achieved.”
 
Fischer on the Hess Incident
That states the case of Allied aid, from the point of view of the capitalist class, as honestly as one could desire. Nor is Lyons in any way unique in presenting the facts. Louis Fischer, Stalinist collaborator for so long, writes concerning the Hess incident in The Nation. By now it is no longer much of a mystery that Hess carried a message that Germany would make peace with England in order to turn on Stalin. It is still not admitted that this message came directly from Hitler and that Churchill played his cards so as to egg Hitler on to attack the Soviet Union by pretending that he might be willing to listen to terms of peace after such an invasion had begun. Hess told Churchill that it was not a question of victory over the Red Army, but that without English aid the campaign would last only three months. With England still at war, the Nazis might require a year for the conquest of the Soviet Union. Churchill chose to get a year’s respite for England.
All of this can occasion not the least surprise on the part of these who never for one moment let go of the class analysis of great social events. It is not the Moore-Brabazons, the assistants of Churchill, who alone desire to see the Red Army and the German army bleed each other to death, with but a single regiment left to the victor. That is the attitude of the “democratic” capitalists from top to bottom. It is but an added crime of the Stalinists that they hide this fact. Their demands on Churchill to open up a “western front” have no other effect than to permit the British reactionary to voice pious hopes concerning Russia’s ability to continue fighting for another winter. To secure a better hold on the English workers, Churchill may even sacrifice those of his assistants who were indiscreet in blurting out the truth about aid to Russia.
The idea of resting the salvation of the Soviet Union on Allied aid is the worst of all chimeras. Stalin fosters this illusion both in Russia and abroad. It is possible that he does so with the purpose of using the failure of such aid to arrive as justification for a capitulation to Hitler. Such a capitulation is not at all ruled out at a later stage. But it is doubtful that Stalin would survive such a catastrophic event for a very long time. The machine which kept him in power by terror would be too weakened for it to function effectively. The Stalin regime would come to its inglorious end.
 
Stalin Incapable of Leading Successful Defense
But if no aid comes to Russia from the Allies, or if that aid is just enough of a trickle to keep the Red Army in being as a pawn of the Allies, must we give up the Soviet Union as lost? Certainly it will be lost if the workers pin their faith in the Roosevelts and Churchills and follow the policies of these capitalist leaders. Only aid from the workers of Europe and America can prevent the USSR from going down to utter defeat.
We have tried for many years to open the eyes of those workers who were still being misled by Stalin as to his true role. Where is the class-conscious worker today who cannot see that Stalin, in the midst of the most terrible danger to the Soviet Union, is incapable of giving any revolutionary leadership? He is utterly incapable of driving any wedge between the German workers and their overlords. He is incapable of giving directives to the workers in other lands that would help to stem the tides of Nazi invasion.
That task must fall to other leadership, to real revolutionary working class leadership. The Soviet Union can be saved, in spite of Stalin, by the courage and devotion of the workers led by revolutionary leaders. Their policies must in no wise be based on the war aims of the “democratic” imperialists who gladly see the sacrifice of the USSR for their benefit. They must be class policies solely in the interest of the international proletariat.
 



Workers will look in vain in the two speeches delivered by Stalin on the anniversary of the Russian Revolution for an answer to the burning question, “How to save the Soviet Union?” His speeches were not intended to answer that question, but rather to explain away the defeats, to justify his criminal course in the past – and to allay the fears of the “democratic” imperialists that the USSR may turn to a revolutionary policy to bring about the defeat of Hitler.
His speeches therefore are couched not in the terms and spirit of the Russian Revolution which created the Soviet Union, but along the lines most acceptable to the “democratic” imperialists.
 
National Approach
On what basis, for example, does he appeal to the masses of the USSR and the world working class to resist the Hitlerite invasion? On the basis that they must defend their “fatherland!” The war of the Soviet Union is to be taken completely on a national plane.
It is in this spirit that the Red Army soldiers are asked to emulate figures of the far distant past who helped Russia become a national state in the period of its rise under the Czars. The meaningless and perfunctory reference to Lenin serves only to highlight the completely reactionary spirit of a speech which in this epoch calls on the workers to pay their respects to Nevsky, Suvoroff and Kutuzoff. These figures are utterly meaningless in our time. Their mention at the same time as the war of intervention of 1918 serves to place the latter back in remote history rather than to give living meaning to the revolutionary struggle.
Stalin uses the speech to continue his game of rewriting history to suit each new occasion, each new veer of policy. Stalin is nothing if not totalitarian, even in his “logic.” Since it is all a matter of the rights of nations, the same criterion must be used in all cases, past as well as present. Hitler, it now seems, performed at one period a truly progressive task!
“While the Hitlerites were engaged in gathering together the Germany which had been carved up by the Versailles Treaty, they could enjoy the support of the German people, who were inspired by the ideal of the restoration of Germany.”
What does it matter that Hitler inflicted the most frightful defeat on the German working class and set back the proletarian revolution for a decade and more, that his counter-revolution led inevitably, as predicted by Leon Trotsky, to this present invasion by the super-Wrangel?
 
When Hitler “Went Wrong”
Reading this speech one would think that there was no necessary relation between the internal conquest of Germany by capitalist reaction and its follow-up in the present imperialist war of plunder. On the contrary, it seems that Hitler just went wrong at a certain stage, for Stalin tells us:
“After this problem had been solved (!) and the Hitlerites set out on their paths of imperialism, on the paths which led to the seizure of foreign lands and the conquests of other peoples, and transformed those peoples and the peoples of Europe and the peoples of the USSR into the sworn enemies of present-day Germany, a profound change of attitude occurred among the German people. They are against a continuation of war.”
There is good reason for Stalin’s mode of presenting history. The reason is the new political line of Stalin. His speech is in reality the first down-payment for the aid he hopes to get from the “democratic” allies. He wants to show them that he will scrupulously refrain from “interference” in any other country. He wishes to prove that he will not appeal in any way whatsoever to class struggle ideas, that he will make no revolutionary appeal to the European working class.
 
Stalin Finds Distinctions
Stalin also tells off the Nazi upstarts who want to encroach on his theory of national socialism, socialism in one country. He informs the world, cost what it may: “It is known that the Hitlerites trample on the Reich workers.” No, truly they are not socialists, those bandits! But then we are told further that not only are they not socialists, they are not even nationalists! The purpose of all this pure balderdash becomes clear. Stalin wants to arrive by hook and by crook at a difference between nationalism – and imperialism. Here is indeed a distinction!
Yesterday, when the pact with Hitler was concluded, Stalin tried to give every token of friendship to Hitler. Then he said it Was the British and American imperialism which was trying to involve Russia in war with Hitler. Today things have changed. The fascists are not nationalists but imperialists; the United States and Britain are nationalists but not imperialists. Thus is the new alliance cemented politically.
The speech was intended for Roosevelt and Churchill, not for the workers. The end of it gives the real aim of the speech:
“As distinct from Hitlerite Germany, the Soviet Union and its allies are waging a war of liberation – a just war calculated for the liberation of the enslaved peoples of Europe and the USSR from Hitler tyranny. Therefore all honest people support the armies of the USSR, Great Britain and the other allies as armies of liberation.”
If the war is a war of liberation naturally every worker should support it. This is what Stalin is now urging. But Stalin does not even dare to distinguish between “workers” and others abroad lest he give offense. Hence the “honest people.” Not only does Stalin in this way give his political thanks for the material aid from the democracies, but he assures these allies that they need have no fear of proletarian revolution anywhere. Where does any talk of such revolution in Europe come from anyhow? Stalin places the responsibility for this spectre – on Hitler!
 
The Spectre of Revolution
He says that Germany calculated on frightening the democracies into a crusade against the Soviet Union by harping on the theme of working class revolution fostered and led by the Comintern. “Their calculations were based in the first place on the earnest hopes of creating a general coalition against the USSR, of drawing Great Britain and the United States into this coalition by intimidating beforehand the ruling circles in these countries with the spectre of revolution and in this way completely isolating our country from the other powers.” This worked, explains Stalin, in the case of France. But “it turned out that the German policy of playing on contradictions and intimidating with the specter of revolution had exhausted its possibilities and was no longer suited to the new situation.”
It is not far to seek the reason for Hitler’s failure to blackmail the democracies any longer with the spectre of revolution. Stalinism had weakened the Soviet Union and the international working class to such a degree that the imperialists feared Hitler more than the threat of revolution for the time being. Under Stalin, the first workers state had become almost a deterrent rather than an example.
Stalin’s speech, we repeat, is devoted to the task of building up every confidence in the ranks of the ruling classes of his allies that they have nothing to fear from revolution. Not so long as Stalin stays in power in the USSR! This is his answer to Hitler and his bid for support.
 
Stalin’s Use to the “Democracies”
The “democratic” imperialists feel little threat from Stalinism at present. They are willing to deal with Stalin today not merely with a view to keeping him in the fight against Hitler, although that is certainly an important consideration for Churchill and Roosevelt.
But there is involved besides a longer-term view. What the imperialists fear above all else is the post-war period in Europe. Victory is still remote, but already they lay plans for policing all of Europe after the war. Such policing is hardly intended for use against the defeated fascists alone. No, it is also intended for use against any attempt on the part of the workers to take their fate into their own hands. Who would be more expert than Stalin in destroying proletarian revolution? He offers his services – and the “democrats” accept them. For them Stalin is to lay the spectre of proletarian revolution both in the USSR (its revival) and throughout Europe.
 



The expansion of Japanese imperialism has taken place historically by a process of shrewd timing and bargaining. Every time that Europe has been engulfed in war or crisis, the Japanese militarists took advantage and reached out for loot in the Pacific. Always too there has been the same use of rivalries and contradictions among the other powers that made for a good diplomatic bargain. Thus Japan made full use of the intense rivalry between Czarist Russia and Great Britain at the end of the nineteenth and the beginning of the twentieth centuries. The seizure of Manchuria was timed when the economic crisis had reached such depths that no country would have dreamed of going to war for the sake of China.
The attempt to subdue the rest of China and to make this vast country a Japanese colony, was timed when fascism had become such a menace in Europe that the powers wanted to have their hands free to deal with the new threats of German imperialism. Japanese timing was again perfect. The generals made only one little mistake. They felt that the seizure of all the ports and the coastline and the industrial centers of the mainland would surely force the Chinese into submission by sheer starvation.
But the very backwardness of China proved her salvation. The Chinese had not yet learned, as an advanced nation, to depend on machinery and mechanization. Human muscles were still the main source of power in production. The Chinese could retreat far into the interior with their simple tools and live on the vast land by raising their own food supply and plying their handicrafts. Each locality could support itself.
It was this ability to continue on their own that threw the entire Japanese machine out of gear. Instead of an “incident” lasting a few months, the Japanese had a full-scale war on their hands, a never-ending war that has brought Japan to the verge of economic ruin.
 
Japan’s Second Miscalculation
Japan’s aim was to continue its expansion by taking further advantage of the war in Europe to seize the colonies of the other powers as well as a part or all of Siberia. If Japan’s hands had not been tied to such an extent in China, the militarists would probably have intervened before now in Siberia. Because China was not yet subdued and required that Japanese troops be maintained there, the imperialists did not dare to invade Siberia until the Soviet Union had been brought to her knees by Hitler. The Japanese relied on Hitler to achieve a quick victory.
This was the second miscalculation, both of Japan and of Hitler, the Red Army stood up better than the Japanese had expected.
Moscow still stands. It is quite likely that Japan was to get the signal to intervene in Siberia the moment Moscow fell. The very showing made by the Red Army made the Mikado’s generals hesitate. The action of the United States and Great Britain in coming to the support of Stalin and in putting the economic squeeze on an already exhausted Japan has further thrown confusion into the hearts of the Nipponese imperialists. They are driven to seek more loot both southwards and northwards but they must act cautiously and seek again the the right timing.
The United States is not yet so much involved in the Atlantic that the Japanese can feel they can go ahead full steam in the Pacific. If the United States became involved by an actual declaration of war against Hitler, the Japanese might once more seize the initiative and move. But for the moment the risk is too great, the enemies too numerous.
In such a situation a nation resorts to diplomacy to try to obtain some partial gains by bargaining while awaiting a more opportune moment to strike. Hence we see the play to gain time with a special diplomat flying to Washington to present “new” proposals. Kurusu himself, the diplomat chosen for this “delicate” work, does not have the slightest faith in his mission. In fact his remarks to friends in Hawaii, “strangely” made public, show that he thinks not only that his mission will fail, but that the very failure may prove the signal for a new Japanese move toward war, United States or no United States.
 
Kurusu’s Mission to the United States
As has been pointed out here many times, the clash of imperialist interests between the two countries is too fundamental to be easily compromised. The newspapers speculate that possibly the Japanese will demand the cessation of all help to China and pressure on Chiang Kai-Shek to come to terms with the Japanese. Such terms would mean the ceding to Japan of a large part of Chinese territory. What does Japan offer to the United States in return? Secret diplomacy docs not permit us in on the conference in Washington. All we can do is to surmise from the facts we have at hand. Probably Japan would offer American capitalism a partially open door; that is, many economic concessions for trading with the new country set up. Also the Japanese may promise not to intervene in Siberia for a period. There might even be an offer to withdraw from the Axis for a suitable consideration. None of this can really be satisfactory to American imperialism which is beginning to get into its stride in military production and to lay out its own time table for conquest.
The crisis in the Pacific is therefore far from a solution, even from an imperialist angle. The postponement of the next move will not mean the end of friction. The explosion cannot be far distant. When it comes, whether the immediate move be to shut off the Burma Road or some other, intervention in Siberia will not be long in following. Japan has hardly concentrated any large number of troops in Indo-China for an adventure towards the Burma Road. At best this could be only a first step. The main armies have been concentrated in Manchuria for a drive against the Red Army.
 



The ex-Ambassador of the United States to the Soviet Union, Joseph E. Davies, has been struck with remarkably sudden light. This light made him delve into his own records on the Moscow Trials.
Unfortunately the records were all too clear. His article in the American Magazine admits:
“With this thought in mind I recently went through my diary, and, with the permission of the State Department, reread some of my reports as American Ambassador to Moscow in 1937 and 1938. Suddenly I saw the picture as I undoubtedly should have seen it at the time in Russia. Much of the world construed the famous treason trials and purges from 1935 to 1938 to be outrageous examples of barbarism, ingratitude, and hysteria. But it now appears that they indicated the amazing far-sightedness of Stalin and his close associates. In the light of present facts, and after an examination of the record, there can be no doubt that those defendants were, directly or indirectly, in the employ of the German and Japanese High Commands.”
What are the present facts to which Davies refers? He states that he, more than any other diplomat, attended the trials and watched the proceedings. His conclusion at the time was no different from that of the rest of the world.
“In my reports, I find that I referred to the second charge (treason and relations with those High Commands) quite casually and as of comparatively little importance.”
He says this not only of himself but of others present:
“But all of us there in Moscow at the time, including the diplomats and the able newspaper correspondents, seem to have ‘missed the boat’. I certainly did.”
That is to say, Davies judged the trials to be nothing but frame-ups at the time.
“We knew that Trotsky had a great many followers in Russia. and we regarded the treason trials as Stalin’s methods of destroying his internal enemies. Talk, of cooperation with the German and Japanese High Commands seemed like so much bizarre window-dressing, a facade to cover the liquidating of counter-revolutionaries.”
 
How Davies Arrives at a Conclusion
Here is a damaging admission indeed. Forgetting it a few sentences later, Davies announces:
“They all pleaded guilty, literally beating their breasts as they heaped guilt upon themselves. But, as a trained lawyer, not without experience in testing the credibility of witnesses in criminal trials, I watched the defendants’ faces, studied their conduct on the stand, and I arrived at the conclusion that the state had unquestionably proved its case.”
What an unfortunate sentence for Davies and his own credibility! Davies can refer only to the faces of the defendants, not to their utterly incredible stories!
But what are the facts that made Davies change his mind? The facts are ABC political facts. Davies never dreamed of reexamining his conclusions drawn right on the spot during the Hitler- Stalin Pact. On the contrary, that Pact redoubled the conviction of the entire world that the trials had been a vast frame-up from start to finish. The facts that changed Davies’ mind have nothing to do with the trials. They have to do with the switch in war alliances when Hitler invaded Russia. The “facts” are that Stalin has become the ally of Great Britain and the United States.
Politics makes strange bedfellows! Davies and Roosevelt have become bedfellows of Stalin’s. The “democracies” will prove their good faith to Stalin. They will give him not only material aid, but political aid as well. The Allies may not establish a “western front” in a hurry at the request of the Kremlin dictator. But a little smokescreen to help rehabilitate a badly-discredited Stalin in the eyes of the “public” – that is really a small expense.
The decisive factor in the mind of the imperialist diplomat is the fact that when Hitler attacked the Soviet Union, no Fifth Column was there to come to Hitler’s aid. Stalin had rid Russia of this Fifth Column in advance. But the Daily Worker said this long before Davies. The trouble is that the “interpretation” proves too much. The appearance of any kind of Fifth Column which might have been linked with the victims of Stalin’s purges, would have been far better “proof”. There is no Fifth Column to aid Hitler and there never was one! The only Fifth Column is the gang in the Kremlin that gave Hitler every aid up to the moment he invaded Russia. Silence on that score cannot wipe away that devastating fact.
But there is the other sad fact, that with so “splendid” a united front against the fascist invader, the Red Army has been forced to retreat and yield the major part of European Russia with two-thirds of all the heavy industry built, at such tremendous sacrifices. One great factor that explains that fact is precisely Stalin’s beheading of the Red Army in the frightful purges. His killing of the entire tops as well as of an officer corps numbering as many as thirty-thousand men left the Soviet Army without those who could have stood up to Hitler’s military strategy.
Stalin failed miserably to convince the working class of the world that the entire Bolshevik cadre built by Lenin were traitors to socialism and to the Soviet Union. But the workers may now be at rest. They may now accept the Stalinist version without any more qualms of conscience. An American ambassador, no less, had his doubts, but his further cogitations (at so opportune a time too!) revealed the true light to him, and through him to the rest of the world.
The truth is that in this very farce Stalinism demonstrates anew its bankruptcy. It must depend on these imperialist hacks to whitewash it and to attempt to revive its credit in the eyes of the masses. But how unfortunate that Davies was foolish enough (although he could not have helped himself!) to reveal his opinion at the time of the trials themselves. The political expediency of the Ambassador’s article, to appease Stalin, sticks out from every side.
 



The most reliable and indispensable instrument to British, capitalism in the war is the trade union bureaucracy. It is through leaders like Bevin, Morrison, Citrine, Alexander that British imperialism entraps the working class into fighting solely for the interests of capitalism.
Suppose Churchill had tried to force the total conscription of labor on the English proletariat by himself. Suppose an out-and-out Tory government had given to itself the totalitarian powers enacted into law in the Emergency Power Act. This act gives the government the right to arrest and detain in prison without any charges, without any trial, without any explanation of any kind, any person it sees fit – for the duration of. the war! It gives Churchill the right to conscript all men and women, of whatever age, and to send them to work or to other duties anywhere in the land.
 
Workers Would Have Battled
Would the workers have entrusted such sweeping powers to a Tory government? Of course not! They would have put up a tremendous battle for their rights. They would have denounced a government which tried to put an end to all their democratic rights. Very wisely, therefore, Churchill put to use those labor “leaders” who dominate the trade unionists by use of their powerful machinery of bureaucracy. He established a Tory-Labor “Coalition” government; that is, a government in which the false representatives of the working class make the workers responsible for the functioning of the capitalist system.
Did the Tories completely and callously neglect to build air-raid shelters for the masses of people?’ Then put a labor man in charge of this department, and let him assure the working class that everything possible is being done – when nothing is actually done. Is it necessary to produce more in the factories, to have the factory hands put in long hours, to have them put up with ever worsening conditions? Then let good old Bevin take the matter in hand. Bevin lays down the (capitalist) law – no strikes or disputes during wartime! The workers must submit to compulsory arbitration, of course with their “own” man on the board that settles issues.
 
Hiding Signs of Discontent
War always means such suffering and hardships for the masses that their hatred for a system which imposes these unbearable conditions is bound to flare up sooner or later. In England elections are held periodically for members of parliament. Since the beginning of the war, there have been fifty-two such elections. To hide any signs of discontent, Churchill got a political “truce” from the Labor Party when he elevated its leaders into the government. Parliament must stay the same during the war – so many Tories, so many Labor members.
What have the workers to gain from all this? Exactly nothing. On the contrary, they lose all along the line. Capitalism strengthens itself at every point at the expense of the proletariat. The workers are tied hand and foot, not only at home but in the colonies as well where the same laws are made to apply with the benediction of Bevin and Company. Under the EPA (Emergency Power Act) the militant fighters for working class rights and for colonial freedom are seized and put in jail. Thus Wallace Johnson, President of the Sierra Leone Trade Union Congress, was jailed at once. So was Uriah Butler who led the militant West Indies strike of 1937. He was deported to a small island (Nelson) off Trinidad. Militant Hindu leaders were similarly disposed of.
 
A Capitalist’s Frank Remarks
The capitalists use these privileged labor leaders to tie the trade unions and the Labor Party to the capitalist state. But let no one suppose that the factory owners have anything but contempt for these tools! The English writer Crowther of the British financial journal, the Economist, expresses this contempt in the New York Times (March 23rd):
“Trade union leaders are elderly gentlemen who want to get higher wages for their members, but otherwise wish to change nothing ... British trade unions occupy approximately the same place in politics today as the Church of England occupied in the last century ... The presence of trade union leaders in the Cabinet is no more a portent of revolution than the fact that Bishops of the Established Church sit in the House of Lords ... Nothing has been more noticeable in Churchill’s cabinet than the personal mediocrity of the labor leaders.”
Crowther would be quite wrong if he thought that the class conscious British workers enjoy the spectacle of these mediocrities pushed around with Churchill’s cane. It is these workers who are demanding an end to the truce between labor and capitalism. This question will come up at the Labor Party Conference to be held this June. But it seems unlikely that the British workers will have gone forward enough by that time to force their leaders to break off the truce and the coalition. Such a step would mean a tremendous sharpening of the class struggle. It would be the greatest news of the war.
Meantime the American working class can learn a great deal from the situation in England. Men like Hillman, Green, Murray, Lewis follow closely in the footsteps of their British prototypes, Bevin and Morrison. They must not be permitted to put over a truce with United States capitalism during the war. The workers would be completely at the mercy of their bosses in that case. The American proletariat must fight for its own interests!
 



Bourgeois writers of history, when they spoke unguardedly, and therefore frankly, called the Balkan or Eastern Question “the problem of filling up the vacuum created by the gradual disappearance of the Turkish Empire from Europe.” In this manner of posing the “problem” there was not a trace of thought given to the Balkan peoples themselves. Long before Hitler was born, the Concert of Europe – was there ever a more ironic name for it? – moved diplomatically to carve up the Balkans among the great powers.
The first great rivals for the inheritance of the Sick Man of Europe (so they called the Sultan) were England and Czarist Russia. Russia wanted Constantinople and an outlet to the sea. England wouldn’t have minded that so much, except that she already possessed India. Hence she dared not tolerate any power having a hold on the Mediterranean which might dominate her lifeline to India and the Far East.
Each of the great powers was anxious to become the “protector” of the small Balkan nations. The Czar was the first protector and in true gangster fashion exacted his price. But in the Crimean War, England muscled in and took over the protection. Today it is Hitler who shoulders aside England, as well his ally Italy, to become the “protector.”
 
It Was Also Napoleon’s Strategy
Hitler is following closely in the footsteps of Napoleon. The latter said: “Really to conquer England we must make ourselves masters of Egypt.” By this Napoleon meant breaking the sea route in the Mediterranean that was a matter of life and death to British imperialism.
The first World War was fought over this same issue when Germany attempted to build the strategic Berlin-to-Bagdad Railway. This would have brought the Kaiser close to the Suez Canal. Now Hitler again wishes to use the Balkans as the stepping-stone to Suez. In the last war Germany wished to gain complete domination of Europe in order next to break up the British Empire. Hitler has followed the same formula, thus far with much greater success.
People who do not understand the working of imperialism in the small nations wonder why Hitler was so successful in keeping the Balkan states apart and swallowing them one at a time. In this Hitler merely inherits the “benefits” derived from the intrigues of all the imperialist powers of Europe. If the Balkan countries had been able to unite in an economic and military Federation, they might have held off all the imperialists. Many a Balkan statesman, even among the bourgeoisie, dreamed of achieving such a union.
 
Why No Balkan Federation Existed
But every time a move was made in this direction the big powers used every machination to frustrate it. We take a few among innumerable examples. In the first Balkan War, Serbia, Greece and Bulgaria formed a League to gain complete independence from Turkey. They were successful, but at the end of the war Germany stepped in and cleverly set the allies against each other by offering support to Greece and Serbia to seize Macedonia, which was predominantly Bulgarian. This brought on the Second Balkan War of 1912–13. To cap matters Germany attracted Bulgaria to her side in the first World War by then holding out the reward of righting the wrong done her!
In 1923, when the peasant leaders, Stambuliski in Bulgaria and Raditch in Yugoslavia, tried to settle their countries’ disputes peacefully and, form an alliance, Mussolini found all his plans disturbed. He had a hand, with the army clique of Bulgaria, in bringing about the assassination of Stambuliski through the use of the Macedonian terrorists in his pay.
Thus the history of the Balkans shows nothing more clearly than the impossibility of the Balkan peoples to live their own lives while imperialism is master in Europe. Imperialism reaches down right to the heart of the small countries of Europe. It lays hold of the financial and banking interests which are tied up closely with the interests of the bigger bankers of the capitalist powers. Through its economic domination it also controls the major political parties and the governments set up on the basis of these parties. Often each party is in the pay of a different imperialist power. The only recourse of the native bourgeoisie is to gravitate from the orbit of one of the powers to that of the other. Its bargaining power lies only in the fact that rival imperialists bid against each other for influence.
 
Only Socialism Can Save the Balkans
It is this interference by powerful outside forces that has made of the Balkans the most unstable section in the world, the powder keg of Europe. Internal stability is unthinkable in small countries where all the complicated lines of diplomacy cross and recross. The Balkans, as backward countries under the yoke of a native feudal-capitalist ruling class, could not possibly withstand the enormous pressure exerted from outside. The fierce class struggles in the Balkan countries, unable to culminate in proletarian revolution, have resulted in army and monarchical dictatorships.
Hitler has for the time being seized hold of the Balkans and he will attempt to adjust their economy to suit that of Germany. But that will depend on his ability to force the peasants to work their fields for him, so as to supply the grain and other foods that Germany got previously from the Balkans. But these peasants have for years been accustomed to a Balkan jacquerie – peasant warfare. They will now transfer this from a fight against the native oppressors to a fight against Hitler. The Balkan Question will remain. Its only solution is the formation of the Socialist United States of Europe.
 



Internationalists feel a bond with every group that expresses itself in the accents of labor. Our sympathies go out all the more readily when an oppressed people like the Jews are involved. We have noted with interest that the Palestine organization of Jewish labor, the Histadrut, is now celebrating its twentieth anniversary.
It would seem from the aims of this organization that we speak a common language. Berl Locker writes in Jewish Frontier:
“The Jewish working class in Palestine, however, is to a very large extent self-made; it has come and continues to come into existence by the purposeful resolve of masses of youth in the Diaspora to change the basic conditions of life of the Jewish people by becoming workers in Palestine ... Becoming a worker is for them the fulfillment of a great mission in the history of their people ... It is this ideal (of work) which inspires them in the daring attempt to create the nucleus of a new economic and social order in the midst of a world built on the conception of personal advantage as the dominating driving force of economic incentive and success.”
Good! Here is the desire for a socialist society based on the labor of all. Counting the families of workers, Histadrut embraces in its membership forty per cent of the Jewish population of Palestine. Thus we deal, not with any small Utopian group on the order of a Brookwood Farm or what-not, but with an authentic mass movement. Here we will not raise any question about its accomplishment; nor even about the possibility of building socialism in one country and that country Palestine.
Our attention is drawn, in common with everybody’s the world over, by the Second Imperialist War which is affecting Palestine very directly. We note that the Jewish community has hailed with delight the release of the fifty-three youth who had armed themselves for self-defense in spite of the efforts of the British Government to keep them unarmed. Britain now would like the help of these same youth, this time with arms; so it releases them.
Simultaneously, the secretary of Histadrut, Remez, addresses a Jewish unit that is being sent to join Wavell’s Army and asks them to remember that they will be “fighting shoulder to shoulder with Britain in the cause of freedom and democracy”. Shertok, head of the Jewish Agency tells us that “the issue of the participation of Jews from Diaspora countries in the war effort alongside Britain, has not yet been dropped.” That is, the formation of a European Jewish Legion. How does all this jibe with the ideal of Histadrut?
 
Britain Is No Friend of Jewry
We must ask a few questions. Is Churchill interested in Palestine in order to permit Histadrut to build socialism? Is he even faintly interested in a homeland for the Jews? What country can we blame most of all for hindering the development of both Jews and Arabs in Palestine – if not England! You propose to fight for Churchill’s democracy: that is for capitalism but, far worse, for an imperialism that refuses any kind of democracy to half the world’s people. Is India so far off that you cannot hear its voice demanding freedom from that self-same democracy you propose to defend?
The youth in Palestine have come from every corner of Europe. They had to flee from the most unbearable conditions, not only in Germany and Austria but in Poland before Hitler took it over and in all the so-called democratic countries. Do you absolve England from having, with all its imperialist policies, maintained these conditions in Europe? Who created post-war Europe in the first instance? Was it Hitler or Lloyd George”? And finally as to Hitler himself, who gave him aid? You are far too intelligent not to know that Churchill would as soon support another Hitler in Germany than permit the workers to take power there.
What are the aims of Churchill and of Roosevelt too? Will they set up, if they win, another Poland? Is that what you defend? Of course you will tell us that you don’t propose to defend imperialism and its purposes. You want to defend the future of the Jews in Palestine. The trouble is, however, you are not under labor’s orders but under Churchill’s. Least of all can you defend your future that way! For the future holds in store the sweeping away of all imperialism and with it, all that clings to it.
What you Zionists say to Churchill is virtually: “Churchill, we will put ourselves at the disposal of British imperialism if you will just let us go on with our purposes. You may do as you please with the rest of the world but help us in Palestine.” That is the obvious contradiction into which you fall the moment you support, under whatever false guise, British “democracy”. That means that you become so absorbed in the single problem of Jewish emancipation that you fail to think through the entire question correctly.
Jewish emancipation, and the sweeping away of anti-Semitism which Palestine alone, as you admit, cannot possibly solve, is bound up with the sweeping away of all imperialism, the fascist type and the false-faced democratic which will soon turn its authentic hideous face to the world.
You are correct when you seek salvation in labor. But you must seek it not merely in Jewish labor in Palestine. You must seek it through giving aid and tying the Jewish movement to the world’s working class.
Only the proletariat can emancipate all the oppressed thru the proletarian revolution. Your “leaders” like Remez and Ben Gurion are playing power-politics. They should study more carefully the fate of the Russian Revolution to see what happens when the historic interests of the proletariat of the world are sacrificed for an apparent temporary “realistic” gain. You must break with such leaders.
 



The American workers are being sold on the idea that all-out aid to English capitalism will help defeat Hitler and so get rid of fascism. At the same time. the English workers have played to them an old and well-tried tune: first we must win the war and defeat the Nazis; then we can have socialism. Churchill flashes his most winning smile in the bomb-torn areas and, while announcing that be has one single war aim – to win the war – lets fall a remark or two that things will, be quite different after the war.
 
Why Not Socialism Now?
The English masses should demand an answer to the simple query: why not socialism now? The first answer they will get is that any move to obtain socialism now would cause difficulties, would split the nation, would disturb class peace. And, that would endanger the victory and permit Hitler to conquer. Who, however, would make it difficult and give trouble? Surely not the workers who would stand to benefit by the elimination of profits, the complete central planning of production for a nationalized economy, the elimination of privileges so that there would be a better distribution of the goods of life. No, it would be the capitalist owners who possess all the privileges who would be up in arms – and who would then stand in the way of conducting a victorious war!
The workers are giving their lives to help defeat fascism. The factory owners haven’t enough gratitude right during the war to yield up anything to those who are giving everything to save the capitalist system. Would these same owners give up any of the prerogatives of their rule after the war?
Assume that England wins the war with Churchill still in power. Where would English economy stand? Right now it is so close to bankruptcy that it must appeal to the United States for aid without any illusion that this assistance will ever be repaid. The end of the war will see an economically helpless England faced with the most gigantic tasks in rebuilding what has been destroyed. The first World War ended with nothing but misery and unemployment for the masses. This war will leave capitalism so rotted through that it would be able to maintain itself only by a terrific slash at the living standards of the English people. In other words, the war will have hastened the entire process of capitalist decay that underlined all Europe in the period between the two wars. That brought fascism to one country after the other because the factory owners had to destroy all resistance to their plans to cut wages, lengthen hours of work, and put the masses on starvation rations. England would be no exception. Churchill or his successors would resort to exactly the same measures that brought Hitler in Germany under similar conditions.
In this process the Churchills would be aided by the United States, for after an utterly exhausting war, England would not even be able to maintain her independence. Churchill tries to undermine Italian morale by gibing at Mussolini for having made Italy nothing but a German province. Mussolini could very well retort that Churchill is rapidly making England a colony of the United States.
 
Workers Can End This War
Churchill tells the British workers that the German people have made themselves responsible for Hitler and all his doings. Otherwise why do they tolerate Hitler? And Hitler talks in exactly the same fashion about Churchill and the English workers. See, he says to the German workers, the English are united against us, the workers are solidly with their bosses. In this argument, however, there is the whole key to ending the war in a victory for the working class. The English workers have it in their power to destroy the “national unity” of Hitler. How could the English proletariat do this? By breaking down the walls of their own national “unity,’’ by sweeping aside the Churchills and their labor lackeys and setting up a workers’ government in England.
Such a government could really and fully mobilize all the resources, all the forces of production and all the people of England to defeat fascism. Hitler could no longer talk of the nefarious plot of the international bankers against Germany.
The hypocrisy of Churchill would make itself evident at once. He would show immediately that his main aim is to win the war – for capitalism, not for democracy. When the French General Staff saw defeat looming, their fear of revolution made them capitulate at once. Churchill, faced, with a proletarian revolution at home, would not hesitate for one moment. He would sooner see the victory of Hitler and the salvation of capitalism through fascism, than the defeat of Hitler by the revolutionary working class. The French capitalists forestalled a revolution by giving in quickly to Hitler. But let the workers of England start their revolution for socialism and the situation would be quite different. When the victorious army of Bismarck faced the armed Paris workers in the days of the Commune, he did not dare send his troops into Paris to disarm the Communards. He did not want his own troops to become infected, for through them all Germany would have burst into flame. The flame of the English revolution would light up first of all Germany and then all .of Europe. Does anyone believe that the German workers are enthusiastic for the war and have any great love for their fascist masters? No, an English revolution would cause the very ground to quake under Hitler’s feet.
All the lessons of the events in Europe since the Russian Revolution make it clear that only the workers can defeat fascism. They cannot leave this task to the “democratic” capitalists, Churchill defends imperialism, not democracy. It is capitalism in putrid decay that breeds fascism. And the wai is hastening and extending this decay. The defeat of Hitler would bring revolution in Germany, no doubt. But if the Churchills were victorious, then they would protect their capitalist system by attempting to drown the German revolution in blood. That would mean a new form of fascism unless the German revolution then spread to England. Any way one looks at it, only the workers can defeat fascism. The English workers can bring Hitler down by themselves taking power in England against the capitalist government.
 



The American press has taken a great interest in an article on Ivan the Terrible that, has appeared in the official Soviet organ, Izvestia. That article portrays the first Czar as a heroic, if cruel figure, whose great achievements for Russia have not been understood. Naturally the world press is little interested in a figure of the Sixteenth, Century. It accepts, without saying so, the obvious analogy between Stalin and Ivan the Terrible. But it is puzzled by the semi-admission of this analogy in Stalin’s press.
The Stalinist bureaucracy certainly rules in the style of Ivan the Terrible. It speaks of itself almost, at one and the same time, as the continuator of Leninism and of Peter the Great and now of his predecessor Ivan the Terrible.
How can one explain this admission?
The explanation lies in the fact that the Stalinist bureaucracy has no solid social foundation under it. It rests neither on the working class, nor on the bourgeoisie. The existence of the ruling clique of the Kremlin is therefore highly unstable and its future is dangerously uncertain. It seeks frantically for some historic tradition on which to rest firmly, but which way shall it look ? Its right petty bourgeois wing, growing stronger and stronger, drags Russia back towards the restoration of capitalism. Its left wing, growing ever weaker, pulls back in fright towards the working class and the proletarian revolution. From the point of view of the reactionary wing, the position of Ivan the Terrible in history is highly significant.
 
Ivan’s Role in History
Ivan the Terrible fits into that period in history when national states arose: Ivan, the first Czar, like Louis XI of France and James I of England used the new force in society, the burghers or commoners, to help subdue his rivals among the nobility, the boyars or lords. Having succeeded, he set himself up as absolute ruler of the feudal nation. In this struggle the Czar, like the Kings, played the progressive role of unifying the nation arid establishing the wide boundaries inside which the capitalist forces could expand and develop.
However, once the King or Czar, had achieved power, he turned upon the commoners who had helped him into the saddle. He then rested his. power on the submissive feudal aristocracy. In order to overthrow feudalism, the capitalists had to dethrone the absolute Kings.
Stalin would like us to read history, in reverse. Those who move in a certain political direction want to persuade themselves and others that their motion is forward. But how can one make reaction appear progressive? By comparing it to that period of history when the same phenomenon, apparently, was progressive. Stalin wants to give the impression that he is using his terribly cruel methods out of necessity, the same necessity that drove Ivan the Terrible to build a strong, lasting nation. Stalin is building Russia!
But in what sense does Stalin rebuild the nation ? His whole work all these years has been one of damming up and stifling the proletarian revolution inside the Russian boundaries. The proletarian revolution cannot be confined inside one country. It tends to spread and sweep away the national boundaries. The capitalist revolution united the nation. The socialist revolution unites the working class and all the oppressed of the entire world. In this day and age, when the national boundaries have become the greatest of obstacles to the progress of humanity, the attempt to bolster them up is reactionary to the highest degree.
The more the Stalinists turn to the traditions of the Russian nation and of capitalist patriotism, the more this indicates that their face it set towards capitalist restoration. But to accomplish this, the bureaucracy will have to settle accounts first of all within its own ranks even more that it has done. It would have to burst into fragments.
 
We Grant Stalin His Analogy
We readily grant Stalin his right to the analogy with Ivan the Terrible so far as cruelty and sadism are concerned. Ivan killed his own son, Izvestia now has it appear, because he was a traitor. Stalin too – do we read the analogy correctly? – killed those he once loved, the great Bolsheviks, because they had become traitors, Ivan the Terrible confessed publicly all his sins. Perhaps Stalin will do the same! Let us aid him. To what were the Bolsheviks traitors? To the revolution? No, only to Stalin’s lust for power, a lust that made of him the willing tool of reaction. In the interests of this reaction, directed against the workers’ revolution that had boosted Stalin to power, Stalin, like Cain, killed all his brothers and many, many more besides.
Even Ivan stands higher in history than Stalin, for at least his cruelty went with a progressive historic cause. Ivan the Terrible strengthened the nation. Stalin undermined the workers’ revolution and weakened the nation. Ivan added territory to Russia. Stalin, by agreement with Hitler, added Finland and the Baltic states. But in doing so he lost the sympathies of the world working class, far more than he gained. If Ivan the Terrible is the symbol of the victorious nation, Stalin is the symbol of working class defeat.
Let Stalin find, his tradition in Ivan. The Russian workers and the world proletariat must regain the traditions of Lenin and Trotsky, of working class victory. They must hurl down the sinister Stalin who belongs in the Sixteenth and not the Twentieth Century!
 



The spector of the Commune drove the French General Staff in the present war to yield Paris to Hitler without a struggle.
In the War of 1870 Bismarck defeated the French army and laid siege to Paris. The armed workers of Paris forced the capitalist government to hold out. Finally the Laval and Petain of hat period, Thiers and Trochu, treacherously gave Paris up in fear of the revolutionary proletariat.
On March 18th, 1871, the Parisian workers rose up against the capitalist betrayers and took the power into their own hands. They established the Commune, the first workers’ government in history. Bismarck, not daring to send his own troops into the fiery furnace of Paris, helped the French capitalists to put down the Commune. Against the working class, the French and German ruling class easily formed a united front.
The Commune lasted only seventy days, but the memory of those days makes the heart of every militant worker beat faster the world over. The devotion and sacrifice of the Communards, butchered against the famous Wall of the Federals by the vile General Gallifet, were not in vain. They had broken the path followed by the Russian proletariat in 1905. Profiting by the lessons of the two defeats, Lenin and Trotsky led the workers to victory in October 1917, less than half a century after the imperishable example of the Commune. That splendid victory marks the greatest turning point in all history. The Soviet form of the workers’ government was based directly on the Commune. Thus today the heritage of the Commune is firmly bound up with the even greater heritage of the Russian Revolution. The celebration of the one is at the same time the celebration of the other.
The more or less peaceful development of the capitalist system, after the downfall of the Commune and up to the first World War, brought a change into the working class movement. The lessons of the Commune were, deliberately ignored and covered up by Social Democracy. Reformism replaced revolutionary Marxism.
It took the new experience of the Russian Revolution itself to revive the lessons of the Commune. The Social Democratic revisions of Marxism were swept away by the strong current of the revolution.
 
Degenerate Stalinism Perverts History
But when the revolutionary wave subsided in Russia, the reactionary Stalinist bureaucracy usurped the power and constituted itself a specially privileged caste to justify its existence, this parasite attempts to falsify Marxism: it violates history in search of some “foundation” and traditions.
It is for this purpose that the gravedigger Stalin orders his paid henchman Dimitrov, head of the Communist International, to “celebrate” the Commune.
Why did the Commune fail? It failed because the proletariat did not have a real program of its own, embodied in a working class party prepared to guide the revolution. Also because the workers did not. act with the utmost firmness against their class enemies.
Out of these correct conclusions about the Commune, Dimitrov tries to manufacture a justification for the Stalin regime in Russia. The article by Dimitrov in the Daily Worker says:
“But the most fundamental weakness of the Commune was that it lacked a genuinely working class communist party ... The October Revolution achieved victory mainly, thanks to the undivided leadership of ONE party, the Communist Party. The Paris Commune suffered defeat primarily because it was led by two parties, neither of which was communist.”
 
How the Russian Revolution Really Happened
The facts of history (how unfortunate for Stalin!) give the lie to this bureaucratic and totalitarian view. The Bolsheviks were in a minority in the Soviets when Lenin and Trotsky demanded that the Soviets take the power. They were willing to back up the other parties, the Mensheviks and the Social Revolutionists, if they would take the power and end the bourgeois government.
Only as the struggle developed between the Soviets and the provisional government did the Bolsheviks win a majority. The October insurrection took place with the help of another party, the Left Social Revolutionists, who broke away at a later period.
It was only an accident of history that the Bolsheviks became the only party in the dictatorship of the proletariat. Why does Stalin try to raise this accident into a principle? For one reason only: to justify his totalitarian grip on the present regime; to justify with revolutionary phrases the fact that no other parties are permitted and no democracy exists in Russia.
 
Marx and Lenin on the Commune
Dimitrov, under orders, forgets Marx and Lenin. Let us remind him of their remarks on the democracy of the Commune. Marx says: “On the other hand, nothing could be more foreign to the spirit of the Commune than to supersede universal suffrage by hierarchic investiture.” But that is precisely what Stalin has done. He rules as a dictator. Universal suffrage is the same fraud in Russia as in Germany.
Again, Marx says:
“The very existence of the Commune involved, as a matter of course, local municipal liberty, but no longer as a check upon the now superseded state power. It could only enter into the head of a Bismarck (as now into the head of a Stalin!) ... to ascribe to the Paris Commune aspirations after the caricature of the old French municipal organizations of 1791, the Prussian municipal constitution which degrades the town governments to mere secondary wheels in the police machinery of the Prussian state.”
A brief quotation from Lenin will show how he was poles apart from the mechanical, bureaucratic idea of unity of the present ruler of the Kremlin:
“Although the Socialist proletariat was divided into many sects, the Commune was a brilliant example of the capacity of the proletariat to unite for the realization of democratic tasks to which the bourgeoisie could only pay lip service.”
The Stalinist gravediggers of the October Revolution celebrate the Commune — and do not even dare to speak about its proletarian democracy! With good cause.
 
A New Alibi for Stalin’s Blood Purges
Dimitrov tries to perform another service for Stalin. He says:
“Secondly the workers of Paris displayed excessive magnanimity toward their class enemies of Versailles and their agents. Instead of adopting extraordinary measures to settle accounts with its enemies, the Commune permitted reaction to organize its forces in the very heart of Paris.”
Are we wrong to see implied in this the “justifying” of the bloody purges of Cain-Stalin? There is only one difficulty with this brazen attempt at finding “traditions”: it is precisely Stalin who has permitted the enemies of the Russian working class to organize at the very top of society, in the very heart of the corrupt bureaucracy. All the extraordinary GPU measures have been aimed at the best revolutionists, the same Bolsheviks who created the unity of October. Stalin’s “extraordinary measures” consist in the creation of a GPU murder-machine reaching out all over the world to kill the enemies not of the workers but of Cain-Stalin.
No, it is clear to all but the doomed and blinded bureaucrats, they cannot find nor build any working class traditions. The Commune is not for their ilk! No parasite has ever been able to sink real roots deep in the hearts of the workers, to flower into noble traditions for all time. Lenin and Trotsky have done that. If Stalin must have a tradition on which to base his regime, let him seek in the proper place, among the gravediggers of revolution. His name will be linked forever, not with the October Revolution, nor with its great predecessor the Commune, but with the Gallifets and the Hitlers, the hangmen of the revolution!
 



The Stalinists and Aid to the USSR
From the very start Roosevelt has felt perfectly free to draw a sharp distinction between aid given to “democratic” England and aid given to Soviet Russia. Aid to England is given in accordance with the lease-lend act, which means without any expectation of payment, now or in the future, except in the exaction of imperialist advantages. Not the slightest move has been made by the President to have Congress include Russia in lease-lend aid. On the contrary, he has expressly announced that all aid would be “sold” at market prices.
The Stalinists wax loudly indignant at this treatment of the USSR by Roosevelt. They make “demands” on “their” government that this discrimination cease and that all-out aid be shipped at once in every form to the USSR. To make this demand the Stalinists naturally found it necessary to change their attitude to aid for Great Britain. Now they always couple the two together. After all, they feel, if they make no distinction between aid to one and aid to the other – why should the U.S. government do so?
Stalin gave aid to the Spanish Loyalist government in the same way that Roosevelt proposes to give aid to Stalin. The analogy is quite exact in two ways. First of all, Stalin forced the loyalists to pay heavily in gold for the munitions so badly needed. Secondly the loyalists were blackmailed into making tremendous political concessions to get aid at all. There is even another aspect to the analogy; namely, that Stalin waited with his aid until it became clear that the Popular Front Spanish government would actually put up some kind of fight and not succumb in short order to the fascists.
Roosevelt-Churchill are doing precisely this same thing with respect to Russia. Stalin must first demonstrate satisfactorily to the Allies that he can survive till the winter-time. All aid thus far (the world spotlighting of a couple of tankers with oil sent to Vladivostok merely serves to emphasize this) has been in the nature of a promise for the future. Moscow would like to see this aid expedited, naturally. But Roosevelt refuses even to hasten the projected meeting in Moscow to coordinate future plans in the military struggle. Stalin wants this meeting in September. Roosevelt says in October. Roosevelt wants the extra month to make sure Stalin can really survive that long before committing himself to anything real.
 
How the “Democracies” Will Aid the USSR
We Trotskyists certainly want to see every bit of aid go to Soviet Russia. But we are quite open-eyed concerning the aid given by the “democratic” imperialist nations to the Soviet Union. In the first place, these imperialists will give aid only as it suits their own interests. Right now, these imperialists congratulate themselves on the fact that the longer Russia continues the struggle, the longer the time given as a reprieve from attack by Hitler on England and the United States. Of course Churchill and Roosevelt take not the slightest interest in the survival of the Soviet state. This they tell us in so many words.
We do not follow the Stalinists in making “demands” on the United States government to give aid to Russia. We draw the same distinction from our side of the class line and the class struggle that Roosevelt draws between the imperialist countries and the oviet Union. We refuse to be misled into political support of the “democracies” by the desire to see all aid given to the Red Army.
Long before the outbreak of the second World War, Trotsky showed the danger to the working class and to the USSR of giving any trust to whichever imperialist allies might find themselves on the same side as Russia in the coming war. Sooner or later in the course of the war these treacherous allies would turn on the Soviet Union and try to annihilate it as a workers’ state. Instead of making demands on Roosevelt for aid, we should absorb, fully and in time, the lesson he and the others have taught the working class. That lesson is that the capitalists do not forget their class interests for one single moment, even in the midst of the most deadly danger.
 
The Blindness of the Stalinists
We must be vigilant to oppose what will inevitably come; that is, pressure by the “democracies” on Stalin for political and economic concessions as payment for aid. Stalin has agreed before the convening of any conference to the eight-point fraud of Roosevelt-Churchill. That agreement contains his promise that he will not use the “emergency” to aid any working-class revolution in western Europe. That means that if Germany should finally throw off the fascist-capitalist shackles, Churchill-Roosevelt would have a free hand to intervene and put down a working-class revolution.
Here we see the treacherous blindness of the Stalinists. Their readiness to sacrifice the future for the present, is the index of their utter pessimism and hopelessness. In England it is the Stalinists who demand that the government oust the more outspoken officials who state frankly that they would like to see Hitler and Stalin fight each other to the utter exhaustion of both. The democracies could then step in and finish off both enemies.
Instead of recognizing this as the true attitude of all allied capitalists, – what else could it be? – the Stalinists lull the workers with the idea that this is the attitude of only a few individuals. But if the British Stalinists wanted to assure full, unadulterated aid to the USSR, they would be mobilizing he British workers to take over the reins of government.
 



The Unsettled Pacific
The attempt of a desperate Japan to “negotiate” her differences with the United States for a moment eased the crisis in the unsettled Pacific. It would be highly interesting for us to know just what was said in the conversations between the August Mikado and the All-Highest Roosevelt. Not only were the Japanese and the American people left outside the sphere of diplomacy, but – more important – the Chinese were not consulted in any way whatsoever. Yet it was the fate of the Chinese people, more than of any other perhaps, that was under discussion. This fact alone throws the clearest light on the nature of the imperialist conference, as well as on the meaning by application of the Churchill-Roosevelt eight points.
Both the Japanese and the. American ruling classes find themselves in an insoluble dilemma. The Japanese dare not face a war on all fronts at once. Their next move in the looting of the Pacific area would almost certainly bring war, a war which in the shortest time would find Japan on one side, and America, England, China, the Dutch East Indies and Soviet Russia on the other. The outcome of such a war can hardly be doubted, with Japan already weakened by the never-ending war in China. It thus devolved on Japanese diplomacy to try to separate the enemies, the most powerful being the U.S. Japan would like to be ready for an instant assault on Siberia, since the advances of the German armies in the West encourage such a move more and more. Put in the most blunt terms, the Japanese therefore explored the question: what would Roosevelt demand as his price for permitting the Japanese to make the attack on Russia without interfering?
Roosevelt would like nothing better than to have some sort of temporary settlement of the Pacific problems so as to move the entire navy into the Atlantic. But what settlement is possible? The future of United States capitalism is as much involved in the Far East as in Europe, although the war in Europe will decide the fate of the world including the Far East. American imperialism cannot allow the Japanese to swallow up all of Asia, especially China, despite the menace of Hitler. Japan demands too high a price of the United States for a temporary agreement in the Pacific – a free hand in China and in Siberia.
 
The Price the U.S. Wants
But the United States also demands an impossible price of the Japanese imperialists; namely, no attack on Siberia while Stalin is engaged with Hitler, and some form of settlement of the “Chinese incident” that would mean even less for Japan than the present status quo. If it were merely a matter of sacrificing the interests of the Chinese people, there would be no hesitation on either side. But the clash of interests of the two powers is far too fundamental to permit even a temporary agreement at the most critical stage of the second World War. The Japanese may hesitate a little longer before making their “sudden” move into Siberia. But the postponement is not expected to be long, as is seen by the removal of Soviet nationals from Japan.
The development of the second world war follows basically the same line of economic, imperialist interests that clashed in the first world war. While the United States and England were deeply involved in Europe, the Japanese generals sent their forces into China and then into Siberia (after the Bolshevik Revolution) to gobble up all they could at the expense of the other powers while the situation permitted. Wilson knew very well that the Japanese intended to keep the territory they grabbed if they had the power to do so. Wilson feared then what Roosevelt fears now: that the Japanese would establish themselves so firmly on the Asiatic mainland as to make it impossible for the United States to dislodge them. That is why the American troops sent to Siberia primarily preoccupied themselves with obstructing the Japanese Army there.
Roosevelt remembers that it was only after extreme pressure, and as late as 1923, four years after intervention had begun and five years after the end of the “official” war, that the last Japanese soldier was removed from Siberia. This time Roosevelt does not propose to consent to Japanese invasion. On the contrary, he will oppose it with force if necessary – and it will be necessary. The United States will be helping Russia not out of any altruistic love for the Russians, certainly not out of friendship for Stalin or for the revolution which he betrayed, but because of its own imperialist interests.
The breakdown of the conversations between the two powers that hope to dominate the Pacific is clear evidence that both feel that matters of life and death for imperialism are involved. In such a case no basis for agreement, even temporary agreement, exists. The United States navy has already received orders to shoot at German and Italian submarines and naval ships. It is extremely likely that the Pacific squadron will receive like orders with respect to Japanese battleships. The Japanese will hardly attempt to invade Siberia without at the same time trying to shut off all supplies for Russia. Vladivostok will be declared under blockade. The United States will then become involved in the war by attempting to break the blockade, using its navy for the purpose. Imperialism cannot solve its problems peacefully. The methods of diplomacy inevitably give way to the methods of force so long as capitalism continues to dominate the earth.
 



Groundswell of Unrest in Europe
The war is at a critical stage in Europe. Soviet Russia has shown a power of resistance that has given the greatest encouragement to the workers arid the masses of all countries. In a material sense also, the war in Russia has encouraged the masses in the conquered countries to rebel against the Nazi conquerors. That is to say, the Germans have been forced, owing to their miscalculation of the strength of the USSR to deplete their forces of occupation in France, Norway, Yugoslavia, etc. But at the same time the using up of materials in the Russian campaign has caused the Nazis to apply even stricter measures in the conquered territories to assure necessary supplies for their armies. Everything seems to converge at this time to bring about a wave of rebellion over Europe against Hitler.
It is not easy to judge how far this unrest will go, how high the wave of resistance will rise. Hitler will stop at nothing to maintain his victorious grip on the throats of all the people of Europe. Under the conditions of war, it is not easy for the Frenchmen, the Norwegians, the Dutch, the Belgians to obtain arms for a real resistance. However these factors are not the ones to look at for the time being. Rather it is the political angle that deserves thought:
A good deal depends on the further course of the struggle in the Soviet Union, that is perfectly obvious. A series of sweeping defeats of the Red Army, should they occur, would tend to act as a deterrent and bring about a subdued mood of the masses of Western Europe. Naturally defeats suffered by Hitler would heighten the movement for liberation everywhere. Even the holding back of the German forces and their bogging down for the Russian winter will keep the morale of workers everywhere quite high.
But there is far more to the political angle than these elements of the question of liberation. It is hardly any kind of program for the future to base everything on the defeat and the ousting of the fascist conquerors. This aim is common to all shades of opinion except those who. bank on profiting by the continued domination of Hitler. The Norwegian and other Quislings would fear to see the Germans depart because it would mean their finish.
Certainly there are many people who think of liberation from the Nazi yoke in terms of national liberations. But just what do they mean by this? Do they mean the restoration of the, nation as it existed just prior to occupation by the German armies? In France the old regime. moved smoothly and directly into the Petain regime. How many Frenchmen today would fight in order to restore Petain and his adherents to full power over France? Certainly the workers would have no such aim. Would the workers prefer the restoration of power to de Gaulle, the man who says openly that he hopes to establish an authoritarian regime of his own – a pro-allied instead of pro-Hitler kind – after victory? It is unlikely that the workers will become de Gaullists on such a program.
The economic phase of “restoration” raises the question of program in even sharper terms. The Nazis have taken over most of the industrial life of the occupied lands. Much of the machinery in these countries has been shipped off to Germany. Goering has used the funds forced out of the treasuries of France to buy up many industries. Shall the workers fight for the restoration of all plants to the former owners? Who is to pay for all this, assuming it could take place?
The moment one begins to ask the meaning of the struggle for national liberation, one finds that in its place the class struggle intervenes. There is only one progressive aspect to the struggle waged in these terms: that is the struggle to defeat the fascists. But to accept the struggle for national liberation in its old terms means. virtually to restore national capitalism, to restore national boundaries, – and on the basis of a national instead of a foreign fascism.
 
The Stalinist Program
All reports from the occupied countries today point to the fact that the masses, aside from their undying opposition to Hitlerism, are apathetic to the political programs of the capitalists of whatever shade. They are just as indifferent to the Stalinist agitation.
For the fact of the matter is that the Stalinists themselves are bankrupt; they can offer no program because they have none. Stalin has already announced agreement to the capitalist program of the eight points, one of which forbids his interference in Western European affairs. For the sake of aid to Russia, we can be sure that Stalin will abide by this point. In fact he showed his readiness to do so in advance by his fear of and incapability of waging a revolutionary war. Newsweek in its latest issue shows what is in the mind of the capitalists so far as pressure on Stalin is concerned as payment for aid. It states that Hopkins got agreement from Stalin to publicly dissolve the CP of the USA as a token of his sincerity in not calling for or aiding revolution anywhere. We do not vouch for the truth of this statement, but we do not ignore it as a straw in the wind. All that the Stalinists have been able to think of, after the attack on Russia, has been the revival of the Popular Front. But the workers have had a thorough experience of this sell-out to the capitalist class.
It follows that what the masses of Europe require more than anything else is leadership, the workers follow no leadership today. A self-confident, firm, clear-headed revolutionary leadership based on a class struggle program to mobilize the working class for the struggle against both foreign and native fascism, has the opportunity today to win the masses in the occupied countries. What such a leadership must show, in all its agitation, is that the struggle against fascism is the struggle against capitalism.
 



Churchill orates time and again concerning the complete mobilization of the resources of the entire British Empire for the purpose of defeating Hitler. But not for one moment does he forget the need of British imperialism to maintain the colonies in their slave status as sources of raw materials and markets for commodities.
The population of India today is not definitely known, but it gets closer and closer to the 400 million mark. Of this vast population, only one and three quarter millions work in factories. This is an index of the industrialization that the Hindus have been permitted to carry out under the “guidance” of Britain. Even if we included the small handicraftsmen carrying on their ancient trades, there would be only 21 million, including the factory workers. That is, only one-half of one percent are actually factory workers; only five percent are handicraftsmen or factory workers.
Since India has vast mineral resources, including iron ore, and plenty of laborers, one might suppose that England would try to build up Indian economy as fast as possible to meet all emergencies. But that would place the Empire in a serious dilemma. The colonial status of India would then tend to disappear at the expense of industrial capitalist England. War or no war, India’s position in the empire must not be disturbed.
The compradore capitalists of India thought that they might be able to profit greatly by the desperate situation of England in the war. These native bourgeois elements did their best to come to terms with Britain for the sole purpose of expanding their industries and their profits. The virtual refusal of the British Raj to come to terms with the Hindu capitalists is proof that England will never voluntarily permit industrial expansion.
 
Some Interesting Figures on India
We are now offered statistical proof of this fact. The Indian firm of Premchand, Roychand and Sons, a firm of Bombay bankers, issues each year an Annual Market Review which gives a picture of the state of Hindu economy. India is the largest unit in the British Empire. Despite the vast resources of minerals and manpower, India remains mostly a supplier of unprocessed raw materials. The British manipulate finances and taxes so as to maintain this condition and to discourage industrialization. A so-called excess-profits tax of 50 per cent was recently boosted to 66 2/3 per cent to place a heavy burden on industry. In addition a 25 per cent surcharge tax was added to all income taxes. Just as in the last war, India is being made to carry an enormous share of the war expenses. After April 1, 1941, the surcharge tax was raised to 33 1/3 per cent. But as though this state of affairs were not bad enough, England has limited, the possible export markets to which India can ship her products. The exports have naturally increased by some 16 per cent in volume – but most of this has gone to England or the Empire – and the prices have been set so that the Indian farmers actually receive less than before. Agricultural products form an important part of the country’s price structure. With farm products selling for less or for no more than before, imported manufactures and locally manufactured non-agricultural products have risen in price. Thus for the largest part of the Indian population the cost of living has gone up while prices received for the farm produce have gone down.
 
Hitler Cannot Teach Churchill
Hitler has nothing to contribute to Churchill in the ruthless treatment of a conquered people. There is nothing that Hitler has done in Europe in the way of looting the conquered nations that cannot be duplicated by the treatment accorded the Indian peoples by England. All that can be said is that Hitler is trying to reduce nations that had advanced far beyond India in the scale of civilization, to the status of India. Churchill carries on the policy of keeping the colonies in their backwardness for the purposes of imperialist exploitation. Hitler carries imperialist policy one step further by attempting to destroy the industrialization already achieved after centuries of effort by the European nations in order to reduce all Europe to the slave status for exploitation by German imperialism. Just as the further advance of European civilization depends on the defeat of Hitler and the ending of capitalism all over Europe, so the further advance of India and all the colonies depends on the defeat of Churchill and the ending of world capitalism.
 



Hopkins Investigates Russia
The significant meeting between Roosevelt arid Churchill was preceded by the sudden trip of Harry Hopkins, Roosevelt’s present alter ego, to Moscow. Hopkins stayed in Russia just long enough to have one of those intimate chats with Stalin – and then returned completely enlightened concerning the whole situation in Soviet Russia. Since the wording of the three points in his report to Roosevelt, as given in the press, has not been in any way denied, and especially since it fits in so well with the needs of the “Allies,” we can accept the widespread accounts as fairly accurate.
First of all Hopkins reported that the Red Army was still intact as a fighting force. The High Command of the Russian army was still functioning well, and this command was in uninterrupted communication with the Soviet government in Moscow. That is all to the good, of course. This item in the report was intended to reassure those reactionaries who were using the argument that any aid given to Stalin would not only be useless, but actually harmful since what was sent might soon fall into the hands of the victorious Hitler.
Even the more recent retreats of the Red Army, particularly from the Ukraine, and the threat to Leningrad, are not looked upon as menacing the continuance of Russian resistance to Hitler. The seizure of the Ukraine by the German army and the possible fall of the great industrial district about and in Leningrad, will be very grave blows at the Red Army and at Soviet Russia, but they will not be immediately fatal. It seems quite certain by now that the war in Russia will continue during the coming winter.
The second point in the Hopkins report is also all to the good. It is certainly clear that Hitler had banked on two false premises. First of all, he had underestimated the strength of the Red Army and its power of resistance. In this he was not alone. The enemies of Russia hoped that the purges of the commanding staffs of the Red Army carried out by Stalin solely as a preventive measure to maintain himself in power, had so undermined the Red Army and so beheaded it that it would prove an easy victim for the fascists.
But Hitler had not only miscalculated concerning the strength of the Red Army. He had also miscalculated concerning the strength of the reactionary forces in the Soviet Union waiting for the chance to strike a blow at the USSR. Hitler had banked on the possibility of a counter-revolution directed against Stalin for the restoration of capitalism. Hopkins therefore brings the reassurance that no such Fifth Column movement materialized and that the whole Soviet Union is united in the courageous struggle against the fascist foe.
 
Hopkins and the Purges
Had Hopkins stopped there, we might not have taken the trouble to comment on what is obvious. But the second point is tied up with a third. The third one is an attempt to “explain” the others. It is also an attempt to lend political aid to Stalin – for a return in kind! What brought about the “unity” of the Soviet Union in the desperate struggle against the fascists? Hopkins tells us that it was Stalin’s remarkable foresight in ridding himself of all “dissident”’ and oppositional elements in the period before Hitler’s march into Russia.
In this fashion Hopkins tries to uphold Stalin’s hand in regard to all the purges and all the infamous Moscow trials. The Stalinists brazenly asserted after every purge that Stalin had strengthened the Soviet Union, not weakened it. They resorted to the fakery of amalgams, classing together the revolutionists with the counter-revolutionists. All opposition to the murderous Stalin was made to appear as opposition to the Soviet Union.
Hopkins wants us at this late ate to accept this long-exposed Stalinist version. He wants us to believe that the present unity of the Soviet workers and peasants against Hitler, is the same’ thing as complete support of Stalin, past and present. Nothing could be more false.
The Soviet masses understand very well that the hordes of Hitler are the worst and most dangerous enemy to the Soviet Union. Their fight is now directed against this fascist imperialist that threatens to deprive them of the last, most fundamental conquests of the October Revolution – the nationalized property and the monopoly of foreign trade. For the time being, until this fight against the main enemy is settled, or is near completion, the masses continue to tolerate Stalinism.
 
Hopkins Hates October Too
Evidently Stalin does not believe his own lies about the nature of the unified struggle against Hitler. For he is preparing betimes, while the attention of the workers is completely taken up by the life-and-death struggle against Hitler, to take all measures against any later attempts at his own removal. That is shown by the establishing of the war dictatorship and the renewed attempt to set up GPU control of the armed forces.
Why did Hopkins give Salin this political support? Because he and Stalin have a common enemy – the October Revolution, the revolution of the working class. Roosevelt-Churchill have made it clear that they intend exacting from Stalin the promise (as though that were in his power!) that he will not attempt to foster any western European revolution during or after the present war. Clearly also the “Allies” fear any possibility of the resurgence of the revolution in Soviet Russia itself. They know very well that they can rely on Stalin to do everything possible to prevent this. Thus Roosevelt and Stalin are showing a united purpose to aim blows not only against Hitler but against the revolutionary workers. Stalin has already given evidence that he will continue his “purges” of revolutionists even during the present war. In this he will have the full support of the “Allies.”
 



War in Pacific Imminent
Hitler’s invasion of Soviet Russia automatically cancelled the Russo-Jap neutrality pact and broke the stalemate in the Pacific. This was indicated politically by the quick change in the Japanese cabinet. Matsuoka, the man responsible for the signing of the pact with Stalin, had to be retired for the time being in order to free the hands of the Japanese government.
Naturally the Pacific War will be fought on a tremendous, far-flung front. It involves all the islands of the Pacific, all the Asiatic colonies or outposts of England and America, China and the mainland of Asia. But above all, it involves Siberia. Thus despite the seizure of Indo-China which may become a base of operations against the Dutch East Indies and Singapore, the Japanese have been concentrating their main strength in Manchukuo, along the Siberian border.
The complete embargo on Japanese trade by the United States, England and the Dutch East Indies, cannot help but be the prelude to war. Its effect is to strangle the Japanese economically and under present circumstances the Nipponese imperialists can meet this situation only by a further extension of their looting. This may mean suicide for the Japanese imperialists, but they are now driven by forces far beyond their’ control.
Hitler is applying the utmost pressure on Japan to enter the war now. But it is clear that he can offer the Mikado no help at all. What he offers is a gamble on the future, an action based on the chance that he will ultimately defeat England and perhaps the United States. Meantime the Japanese would have to fight in the present – and who can tell what changes may take place in the rotten, undermined semi-feudal structure of Japan between now and Hitler’s possible victory?
Japan is now in a most unfavorable position from the military point of view. She is ringed around by enemies, encircled as the Japanese put it, by the ABCD powers; that is, by America, Britain, China and the Dutch East Indies. The Japanese navy is quite powerful, and the Mikado’s statesmen may hope that the Battle of the Atlantic is of such vital importance to the United States that most of its fleet will remain in the west to assure the transport of supplies to England – but there can be no certainty of this.
 
Japan and Aid to the USSR
Now the situation has become far more menacing with the promise by Roosevelt of unlimited aid to the Soviet Union. The meeting between Roosevelt and Churchill, besides making important decisions concerning the almost certain war with Japan, has resulted in the calling of a conference in Moscow to coordinate all war activities of the three countries.
Already Japanese spokesmen have “warned” that relations with Moscow would become extremely precarious if collaboration with Britain and the United States is extended to the Far East as well as to Europe. Among other things this would mean a three-power plan for aid to China. It would also mean the establishment of American bases in Siberia to protect shipments of munitions and other forms of aid to Soviet Russia from attack by the Axis powers, whether Germany or Japan. It is well known that Japan gave considerable aid to German raiders in the Pacific. Japanese ships might now be outfitted for Germany on a larger scale than ever to prevent aid from reaching Vladivostok. But this would merely bring about an undeclared war with the U.S. navy convoying ships across the Pacific as it is doing across the Atlantic. How long would it be before a naval clash occurred that would precipitate large-scale war?
Vladivostok becomes the key point in the Pacific in this entire situation. It is through this point that all shipments must pass to reach European Russia as quickly as possible. For that port is the Pacific terminus of the Trans-Siberian Railway over which all goods must be sent. The capture of Vladivostok and the destruction of the railroad by the Japanese would cripple all attempts to aid Russia. Furthermore Vladivostok is the nearest point menacing Japanese cities with the possibility of bombing by planes, and menacing the Japanese navy as a submarine base. It seems clear that the diplomatic fencing of the Pacific powers must give way under the strain of all the imperialist problems. The question of division and redivision of the earth is insoluble except by means of the sword. The Japanese are preparing their forces for an attack on Siberia in order to seize the Maritime Provinces and the eastern part of Siberia. Clashes between the Red Army and the imperialist forces of the Mikado have begun on a small scale. The real clash may come at any moment.
The United States would prefer to keep its hands free for the Battle of the Atlantic, and not to. divide its forces between the two oceans. A Pacific War would divert supplies that could otherwise be used by England and Russia directly against the German armies. But everything points to United States involvement in the Pacific phase of the world imperialist war even before entry as an actual combatant in the Atlantic war. It does not seem likely that the Japanese can win such a war. But they can blunt the full force of the allied blows against Hitler. They may help also to prolong the war considerably.
Above all, it must be remembered that imperialism can no longer help itself. The second imperialist war drags every country into its swirling vortex because it sharpens unbearably every rivalry, every tension. Japan is powerless under the present imperialist regime to change its course. But for that matter, so is the United States, the future of whose capitalism is at stake as much as that of every other country.
 



The most vicious of all war mongers have been and are the Social Democrats, and more particularly the émigré section.
In the period preceding the second World War, while Blum was still in the cabinet in France, there was a division in the ranks of the Second International between those who had already been driven out of power and into exile, and those who still served the bourgeoisie in official posts at home. The defeat of France ended this rift and united all the ousted ones in the holy cause of “anti-Hitlerism.” No longer was there a group interested primarily in maintaining the status quo for the sole purpose of holding on to their jobs. Now all became united in clamoring for American intervention to restore a past that has disappeared forever.
The worst case of all (if there can be a worst among such a wholly miserable crew) is that of Willi Schlamm now of the New Leader. This political clown, whose career has rung all the variegated hues and changes from right to left and back. again, literally foams at the mouth in his eagerness to see the United States jump into the war. In his book on the Second War of Independence he winds up by advocating that all those who oppose American entry into the war be placed in American concentration camps!
 
They Fear the European Proletariat
What, then, is the outlook of these social-patriots for the future? Surely they must have a worthwhile program for which men would be willing to fight to the death! Sad to tell, with all their mouthing of phrases in favor of democracy (capitalist style), every word they utter shows only complete consternation and fear in face of the future. These great “realists,” who look upon us as Utopians, demand not only intervention by Roosevelt against Hitler, but also against the working class of Europe after the defeat of Hitler! Their fear of the revolution is coated by moral talk against the policies of revenge that the masses will pursue upon the downfall of fascism.
Schlamm calls for the future policing of Europe by American imperialism, no less. Here is what he says in the July 26th issue of the New Leader:
“Before I can admit any chance for any kind of sane post-war reconstruction, I want to see NICE, SOBER, WELL-BALANCED COPS (his emphasis) all over Europe – the type of cops you can meet in New York and London. Friendly, humorous, unhysterical officers (a breed only the Anglo-Saxon nations have so far succeeded in producing) to whom anyone can turn with full confidence that the well-built chap will reliably wrest the gun from the hands of the madman who is waiting for you around the corner. Provocative as it sounds, and unpopular as it is – not before this sort of police has the continent under control (and for quite a time) will the world have any chance to talk sense with Europe.”
We do not quote Schlamm because he is exceptional in any way. He truly represents the Second International. Only he blurts things out in a crude and unpolished manner. The other Mensheviks learned the value of stating their politics in well-rounded idealistic phrases. But their outlook is no whit different. When they speak of a new League of Nations under capitalism, all they mean is a world dominated and policed by Anglo-American imperialism. And when they come down to cases, they must admit as much.
 
They Are Lackeys of Imperialism
But What then is the meaning of their “ideological” struggle, the struggle for democracy? Clearly they mean bourgeois democracy, the kind of democracy that distrusts the masses and keeps real power in the hands of the ruling minority. Without a capitalist ruling class to whom these wretches can sell their services, they can see no future. If the United States does not take-over. Europe after the war, then the Schlamms see nothing but blackness and chaos. Soviets, a Soviet United States of Europe? They call Utopian this, the only policy that can really save not only Europe but all civilization.
These reactionary bankrupts reveal their counter-revolutionary role in advance. If Hitler is overthrown, whom do the Schlamms then fear? Would not the European workers come to life at once and attempt to establish a working-class regime? Yes, and the Schlamms fear the workers as much as they fear Hitler. The Schlamms have long since lost all sense of class distinctions. They identify the proletarian revolution with Stalinist totalitarianism, Bolshevism with Stalinism. Fascism and Bolshevism are all one to these cretins who still call on the bourgeois-state for help despite all the experience of the past.
But, truth to tell, this type of confusion merely expresses their paralyzing fear of the working class. In advance they ask Roosevelt to take steps to crush any attempts at revolt on the part of the European working class. But how will Roosevelt gain control of Europe as against the workers? He must use the armed forces of the United States, consisting for the most part of workers. Schlamm forgets the lessons of the last war, the lessons of the attempts at intervention against the Russian October Revolution. We must remind the Schlamms of the experience of the American troops in Murmansk and in Siberia.
The past that Schlamm would like to see restored has definitely passed forever. Not the Second International will gain by the downfall of Hitler: the workers will not accept its restoration in power at the hands of new oppressors; nor the Third International. They will accept only that International which has complete faith in the ability of the workers to build the future civilization, to build the socialist society first and foremost by establishing the Soviet United States of Europe, the Fourth International.
 



Workers Want to Aid Soviet Union
The workers everywhere in Europe show by their actions that they are far from indifferent to the fate of the USSR in the present struggle. Defense of the Soviet Union has in it the positive element of a program of hope for the future. Defeat of Hitler forms only the beginning of such a program – because it still leaves open the entire question of the struggle at home after such a defeat.
Meantime the capitalists in the anti-Hitler camp are utilizing the issue of aid to Soviet Russia in their own way – as is to be expected. Take the example of England. Churchill is greatly pleased to permit the workers to feel a really popular reason for maintaining national unity. Only recently there were strikes of English workers against conditions and particularly against the long hours demanded of them in the factories. Now comes the issue of aid to Soviet Russia, struggling heroically against the most powerful army in history. The Bevins and the Morrissons had no difficulty at all in getting Churchill to endorse the idea of a “Tanks for Russia” week. It is reported, and no doubt with truth, that some workers gave up their vacations to boost production for the sake of having more tanks reach the Red Army. Production of munitions reached unprecedented heights.
The enthusiasm of the British workers for the cause of the Red Army certainly does credit to their intelligence. The instinct of the working class in this issue should serve as a real lesson to those pseudo-revolutionists who tell the world that they are quite indifferent as to who wins the victory in the war between Germany and Russia. These people used to challenge us to explain to workers that there is a difference between Stalin and the Soviet Union. By their actions all over Europe workers are showing how well they do understand precisely this great difference.
But it is unfortunate that this political intelligence does not extend still further. In the first place, the workers can never have assurance, so long as the capitalist class retains its power, that the aid which the workers contribute willingly will ever actually reach the Red Army. Aid will be sent only so long as it suits the Roosevelts and Churchills to keep sending it. It appears now that even the “Tanks for Russia” week had a catch in it that the workers did not appreciate till it was all over. Then it was explained that of course not all the different tanks and munitions produced could be used by the Red Army. Only certain sizes would be sent, and the full production of tanks would be credited to Russia for future delivery. In the same way we hear on this side that Roosevelt is most anxious to send help – but, he pretends, the Russians won’t enlighten him as to what they really need.
 
Flow to Assure Aid to the USSR
The workers can assure aid to Russia – besides making absolutely sure of the defeat of all forms of fascism everywhere – only by having complete control over the sending of aid. That means not supporting Churchill and Roosevelt in a national unity which leaves power in the hands of these capitalist leaders, but the establishing of a proletarian unity which would take the power of- the state into the workers’ own hands and permit the workers to dictate all political policies of the nation.
This question of political power is taking on the most fundamental importance in Europe, where the masses of all the countries under the heel of German and Italian fascism are seething with revolt. It can be said with the utmost certainty that if these masses place themselves behind a leadership of petty-bourgeois or bourgeois elements whose aim it is to restore the nation as it existed just before the war, then the toilers will be betrayed into the hands of the self-same oppressors whose rule today makes fascism inevitable. The defeat of the capitalist nation by Hitler has weakened the native capitalist masters. The masses must take full advantage of this situation. They must combine the struggle to break the chains of the German oppressor with the struggle to throw off the national capitalist yoke as well. This combined struggle is perfectly possible, rt is the only road to salvation for Europe and for the entire civilized world today.
The same pseudo-revolutionists who can see no difference between victory for Hitler and a victory for Stalin in the war also deride the idea of a simultaneous struggle to defeat fascism and to overthrow capitalism in order to replace it with socialism. Precisely this simultaneous struggle, however, is the inevitable necessity of the entire European state of affairs today. Merely to speak of defeat of Hitler would lead to social- patriotism. Merely to speak of waging the class struggle against the native bourgeoisie regardless of possible defeat by German fascism, is to ignore the meaning of fascism which would wipe out the revolutionists who might attempt to overthrow of the native capitalists after their defeat by Hitler. The solution to this desperate- situation is not the choice of any lesser evil – support of the “democratic” bourgeoisie against Hitler – but a simultaneous struggle against both.
 



China and the War
It took four years of warfare in China to persuade the United States imperialists that China could resist the Japanese invasion. In that four years Japan was forced to strain her economy to the utmost to keep her armies in the field and to continue policing the vast stretches of territory that the Mikado hoped to swallow. Japan spent ten times as much on this war as on the Russo-Jap War. Her casualties in killed, wounded, and diseased were also far greater, having reached over a million by March 1940 alone. With all her tremendous sacrifices of “blood and treasure” as the lingo of diplomacy likes to put it, Japan has proved unable to accomplish the subjugation of China.
United States aid to China obviously is for the purpose of keeping Japan occupied with the war on the continent of Asia so that the Japanese militarists will not be able to turn their full attention to other spheres, such as the Dutch East Indies and Singapore. The moment the Japanese began to withdraw troops from the Chinese interior for the movement southwards to Indo-China, Chiang Kai-shek opened the biggest military operations he had thus far attempted. Chinese troops took the offensive in five of the overrun provinces. This campaign was not merely for the recovery of territory and for the defeat of the weakened Japanese garrisons, but its purpose was as much political as military. It was an attempt to demonstrate to the United States and England that China could keep the Japanese occupied and prevent their withdrawal of really great forces from the Chinese mainland. Such a demonstration would enlist further aid from the “democracies.”
The new campaign was also China’s answer to the letter sent to President Roosevelt directly by the Japanese Premier Konoye on August 28th of this year. The Chinese had every reason to feel alarmed concerning the outcome of that letter which started negotiations between the two imperialist powers to seek a temporary solution of the Pacific problem. For after all, the United States had never ceased, in the entire four years of war in the Far East, to continue selling the raw materials to Japan that were absolutely necessary to her for continuation of the attack on China. With Russia now completely absorbed in the war with Germany, China has no place to turn for aid except to the United States.
 
Roosevelt Cannot Withdraw Forces
Roosevelt had to weigh two factors in the discussions looking to an alleviation of the tense relations with Japan. Without actually being at war, Japan has nevertheless continued all this time to hold half the American navy in Pacific waters. Not only that, but planes and munitions that might have been useful to England, and now to Russia, against Hitler, are also tied up, immobilized, in all the ports of the Far East.
Evidently the war in the East has coalesced too closely with that in the West to permit any kind of compromise. Each of the powers is too deeply involved to permit even a temporary solution. The Japanese are face to face with a desperate situation and would like to find a way out without facing all the enemies in the East. But at the same time they must think of the future. If Hitler should win the war, then a Japan which now deserted the Axis would face a far more formidable enemy on the mainland of Asia than either China or Russia.
The Japanese cannot merely afford to mark time while waiting for events in Europe to help resolve their problem. Waiting now means weakening of her position both economically and militarily. The Chinese will continue receiving help along the Burma road from the United States and this help will enable them to put up a far more formidable fight than has been the case up to now. Help will also go to the Siberian forces of the Soviet Union and this will mean a more difficult task for the Japanese Army there also. Meanwhile China does not permit any really great withdrawal of the Nipponese troops. Japan simply cannot afford to abandon China for that country would then become united as never before to keep the Japanese out in any new attempt at invasion later. China has thus become the key to the entire situation in the Far East.
 
Meaning of Japan’s New Campaign
There are those who see in the desperate situation of Japan the means of tying the hands of the militarists and imperialists. They reason that it would be national suicide for the generals to start a new war, say in Siberia. But history has shown all too clearly, again and again, that the reactionary ruling clique never gives up its power voluntarily. The policy of looting of the Pacific region has brought the nation to a tremendous crisis, but it has at the same time enhanced greatly the privileged position of the semi-feudal army caste. To them, just as to Hitler, the solution to their problems lies not in peace but in further looting.
The new campaign of the Japanese army in the interior of China is to be viewed with this in mind. It is not the symptom that the Japanese are now determined to concentrate on the final wiping out of Chiang Kai-shek. Rather it is an attempt to destroy as much of the Chinese forces as possible as well as to drive these forces back disorganized once more into the remotest sections of China, before the Japanese start on a new adventure. The taking and then abandoning of Changsha indicates this to be the case. The march towards Chengchow is a similar indication, for the object is to destroy as much as possible so that it will take a long time to rebuild what the Chinese had accomplished, – to permit the Japanese to start on a new expedition of loot. The breakdown of the negotiations between Japan and the United States (these negotiations continue only by inertia) may well mark the beginning of the long-awaited attack on the USSR.
 



The Churchills Look Ahead
The social democrats of every land yield to no one in their hatred of Hitler. Their entire creed sums itself up around this platform – down with Hitler! So fierce is their hatred that it cannot contain itself, but extends to hatred of the entire nation over which Hitler now rules. The social patriots are fearful. that the master class will not know how to treat Germany when Hitler is finally defeated by the democracies. Their great anxiety nowadays is therefore to advise the capitalists (beg pardon, the democrats!) on just what measures to adopt against a defeated Germany.
The Churchills aye, however, quite foresighted when it comes to the game of politics. They view the problems of war and of the post-war era from a consistent class angle. They try to prepare the ground long in advance for all eventualities. One of the consequences of the defeat of Hitler worries them exceedingly. What will the workers and the masses of Germany do after such a defeat? The veriest tyro in politics is aware that revolution in Germany would then sweep all before it, and that such a revolution could not stop short of the taking of power by the proletariat to build a socialist society.
Churchill has no intention whatever of fighting Hitler in order to hand the power over to the working class. His concern is to preserve the capitalist system, but with English imperialism as top dog. Hence the English prime minister, looking ahead, attempts to psychologize the English masses in such a way that he will be able to use them not only against Hitler but against the German workers at a later date,
 
Function of Labor Lieutenants
This is the aim that is furthered by the social patriotic camp followers of the master class. All their discussions of war aims and of the arrangement and adjustment of the post-war world concede to the Allied imperialists the right, nay duty, to patrol all Europe after the war to prevent “chaos”. In reality this concedes the right to continue chaos and to reestablish it as a system.
Support for the Roosevelts and the Churchills means support for this fundamental policy which flows inevitably from the aims of the capitalists in the war. Naturally, however, it would hardly do for the war-makers to state their aims in this bald fashion. These need re-interpretation and quite a bit of polishing-up before being served as mental food to the toilers. That is precisely where the social democrats come in. Their function is to talk capitalist ideas in working class language. That is why what they say sounds just like double-talk.
We have the perfect example of this in the message sent by the new Australian Premier, John Curtin, to his co-workers of the New Leader in this country. How proud they are to place his words at the top of their paper! The very last sentence of his cable is printed in bold, big letters: “The unity of labor in common purpose throughout the world alone will save civilization.” And this leader of the Australian Labor Party sends his message – so he says – “on behalf of a solid, united labor movement.” What is the common purpose? Labor “has been inflexible in its determination to play the fullest part in the maximum war effort by Australia. The Labor Government stands by Australia, just as Australia stands with the Empire and her Allies in resisting aggression wherever the rights and privileges of freedom-loving people are imperilled anywhere in the world.”
 
Unity – On What Program?
Just in case you did not know what the war was all about, Curtin enlightens you. “Those rights and privileges (granted by whom?) include the right of association in trade unions, and of collective bargaining – enjoyed by British workmen for almost half a century. Those rights symbolise the democracy for which we are fighting.”
Talking in terms of unity, the real achievement of the Curtins is to bring about disunity everywhere. They feel unity and act accordingly, not with the German workers (whom they helped betray to Hitler), but with the imperial British masters. Their unity is not with the Hindu and Indian masses ground into the dust, but with the oppressors of these masses. Every step the Curtins take (in and out of England) is calculated to keep the English workers and the colonial peoples apart, not to bring them together.
On what program would Curtin propose that the workers everywhere should unite to save civilization? Does he propose to the German workers that they fight Hitler in order to give the victory to Churchill? Yet that is the only purpose contained in all that the Curtins do and all that they say – victory for British imperialism. To the German workers that means only a worse Versailles and a worse form of slavery in Europe, Shall the European working class unite with the labor lieutenants to enable the Allied armies to patrol their lands and keep “order?”
It is absolutely correct to say that the unity of labor in common purpose throughout the world alone will save civilization. That unity can be achieved only on the basis of a working class program. But the very essence of such a program is its unalterable opposition to the schemes and actions of the capitalist class, at home and abroad. Unity can only be obtained by reaching across all borders, in spite of all the Churchills and all their assistants, to create solidarity of worker to worker in order to oppose and frustrate the oppressor aims of all the exploiters, whether in the fascist camp or in the “democratic” camp. The German workers must be assured of support in their coming struggles against their masters.
 



It would be hard to find a more bewildered group of individuals today than those who split away from the Socialist Workers Party to form their own little organization, the so-called Workers Party. The September issue of their theoretical organ, the New International, contains a “Manifesto” on the War in Russia. We call attention to it here in order to illustrate once again the utter political bankruptcy which results when events catch up with utterly false theories.
You will look in vain for any explanation of the war in terms of “Russian imperialism’’, or Stalinist “imperialism”, the “idea” that motivated this group to form its own party. Forced to recognizer the most obvious facts, the manifesto waxes almost lyrical concerning the fight of the masses against fascism. This, we are told takes place in spite of Stalin and all his works. But the Lebruns and Co. are not to be moved!
The main question that faces every conscious political person at the present time is; what stand should be taken on the war? In a manifesto devoted to the war in Russia, surely one would expect a simple, clear answer to this simple clear question. In truth, however, the manifesto is written precisely with an eye to evading this question, and to suit all-comers.
“Whatever may be the end of the Russo-German war, the regime of the Stalinist burocracy is doomed. Russian victory against Hitler would only be made possible by a profound revolution of the masses and the consequent restoration of the conquests of October and of the rights and benefits to the Russian working class that the Bolshevik revolution sought to give them in its beginning.”
And prior to this statement we have:
“In the Soviet Union, more than in any other country, victory in case of war will be assured mainly by the power of its ideals, by the international solidarity of the workers, by the revolutionary prospects in other countries, and not by the Russian guns, tanks and planes alone.”
But for reasons that are clear only to the WP, Stalin alone is made custodian of the revolutionary process. “These ideological weapons have been squandered by Stalin.” Hence we must discard a vain hope.
 
The “Logic” of the Petty-Bourgeosie
One would suppose that with these as the’ premises for Soviet victory, there could be no two choices in the matter: one must be for the victory of the Soviet Union at all costs, for even with victory Stalin is doomed. Shall we at least make the effort to meet these conditions for the advance of the workers’ revolution? We quote the logic of the manifesto on this crucial point. We have omitted no step in the reasoning, nothing is left out. “If this fails to come, what the Soviet Union may expect is defeat by Hitler’s guns or, possibly, dismemberment even in ease of an Allied victory. There is therefore no place in this war for defense of the present Soviet regime under Stalin’s dictatorship”. How did this conclusion sneak in?’
Truth to tell, the writer forgets what he wrote from one sentence to the next. Having been informed that the Stalin regime is doomed no matter what the outcome of the war, we go back and read this interesting bit of argumentation:
“If the bureaucratic gang were able to go through the whole process of the present war uninjured, then the establishment of a new social class, based on a collective form of property, would be the clearly visible culmination of Russia’s political and economic evolution.”
This cannot be.
Nevertheless, the writer then bases his conclusions on precisely this bit of conditional reasoning that simply cannot be. Hitler’s victory will accomplish (for the working class, if the writer is to be understood) one great progressive task; namely, the destruction of the Stalinist totalitarian regime.
 
The End-Product of Soviet Defeatism
When it comes to obscurantism, the writer of the manifesto yields nothing to Hitler. Covered over under these phrases is the desirability of a Russian defeat because it will overthrow the Stalinist regime. One would suppose that the veriest child would understand that this means killing not only the Stalinist regime but the October Revolution as well.
To get around this fact the manifesto resorts to the purest form of mysticism. Hitler’s victory will at the same time mean his defeat! How come? The Russian proletariat will then revive, Hitler having rendered them the proper aid for the purpose by getting rid of Stalin. Incredible, but here it is:
“Assaulting Russia, the most he can do, besides getting some immediate material advantages in case of an over-powering but transient victory, is to destroy a decayed regime and crush Stalinism. But the Russian land in its immensity will absorb his exclusively military victory and meanwhile the people, who are tempered by the traditions of their great revolution and brought up in anti-fascist hatred, are immune from internal poisoning by means of assimilation of the conqueror’s ideology. By destroying with his guns the Stalinist totalitarian regime, Hitler, like the sorcerer’s apprentice of the fable, will have set loose the forces of history, bringing forth the torrents of revolution.”
If the Russian workers were unable by themselves to throw off the Stalinist incubus, just how will they be enabled to throw off the more powerful Hitler after his complete dispersal of all Soviet forces and institutions? Please do not expect any kind of answer from the manifesto. Its thinking is on a plane all its own, following no laws of either ordinary logic or of dialectics, but a schematism that fits an unreal world. The question remains: aside from canvassing, even in its own peculiar way, all the possibilities of victory or defeat, is the WP for or against Russian victory, or is it completely indifferent? Only shame-faced cowardice keeps the manifesto from giving a simple answer to this simple question.
 

