




Bulletin
AKRON. Ohio, Feb. 21. – Goodyear Tire plants remained idle here as large mass picket lines blockaded all gates and kept scabs at bay. Officials, unable to break through the line, in action for four days, have applied to the courts for an injunction. Sheriff James T. Flower declared his readiness to violently smash through the lines in case of a favorable court decision.



* * *
AKRON, Ohio Feb. 16 – Rubber workers at Goodyear threatened to strike this week unless the company took back seventy-five Plant-2 workers layed off last week, thus bringing the crises throughout the tire industry to another open flare-up.
Already the company was forced to swallow its statement that 137 workers who led the latest “sit-down” at Plant 2 last Friday were permanently fired.
The plant, which ordinarily runs on Saturday and Monday, was closed down by the company until Tuesday, 6 a.m. in the hope that the workers could be pacified in the meantime.
Instead, workers flocked to the headquarters of the Goodyear local of the United Rubber Workers of America, and joined solidly into the growing movement to stop lay-offs and wage cuts once and for all through a strike.
 
Calling the Bosses’ Hand
The last “sit-down” was joined by 2,000 tire-builders at Plant-2 and drew sympathetic “sit-downs” from all other departments which have another 2,000 men.
When the company threatened to fire the entire third shift department, a rubber worker took the floor in the factory and told the personnel manager, Fred Climer: “You’ve been ordering us workers around for a long time, now it’s our turn.”
The company announced that the 137 men on that shift, “ring leaders” were fired. But when the entire plant made preparations to strike on Saturday, the company officials called the company union together and “negotiated” a rehiring of the men.
 
One for All, All for One!
A union committee meets Monday at 1 p.m. with the management to demand the rehiring of the 75 men. If the company refuses, the rubber workers at a mass rally Monday night will vote on shutting down the plant Tuesday morning.
At a rally Sunday afternoon, over 1,000 workers voiced their sentiment for strike by cheering speaker after speaker who said, “Either we all go back to work Tuesday, or none of us.”
The rubber workers in other Akron plants and of course Goodyear Plant-1 are watching closely each move and it appears very probable that if a picket line is formed at Plant-2, every plant in the city will be closed.
The workers’ grievances at the shops can be summarized around these points. They demand:
 
Workers’ Demands




Abolition of Flying Squads.
 
Abolition of the company-formed scab organizations.
 
Restore wage cuts of recent weeks.
 
Rehire layed-off men.
 
A 30-hour week.
 
Union recognition.
 
No more speed-up.




The latest Goodyear “sit-down”came with dramatic swiftness that took the company by complete surprise and brought wide support to the workers, union and non-union.
 
“We’ll Stop at 3!’’
Lay-off notices were being explained to grumbling workers on fourth shift by a company man when a worker shouted. “We’ll stop work at 3!”
Other workers took up the cry and chanted. “We’ll stop work at 3!”
Soon half of Plant-2 was shouting the slogan in unison while company officials fumed in rage.
Three o’clock came and everyone sat down at their machines as though by pre-arranged plans. Actually it was spontaneous.
The company agreed to talk to a committee selected by the men and composed mainly of unionists. A conference was scheduled at 1 p.m. the next afternoon.
 
Plant Closed
Meanwhile the company announced and newspapers shouted that the “sit-down” was over. Of course, the company refused to take back the men.
The news came just as the third shift, composed of ten-year servicemen, were ringing in for work. The entire department sat down immediately and were joined by the curing and mill rooms.
Realizing the seriousness of the situation, the company refused to let the fourth shift come into work because they knew it would join the “sit-down”. Instead the plant was closed.
Acting much quicker than in the last “sit-down” union officials called department meetings and most of the workers concerned came and joined the union in addition to recording their sentiment for strike unless the 75 men were rehired.
 
Scabs Ineffective
Plant-1 workers, smarting under the defeat of two weeks ago when their “sit-down” was broken, are expected to join in the strike movement immediately, thus involving 15,500 employees.
Telephone from various unions during the Goodyear conference gave assurance of complete support and joining with the strike, if it is called.
Naturally, complete shutdown of the plants is assured by a strike even though some workers do not join the movement for the key departments are 100 per cent unionized and very militant.
Even though scabs were brought into the plant, the highly technical nature of the key jobs which involve over 80 per cent of the employees, would make it impossible for them to handle the machinery and build tires!
The danger of the situation is in the refusal of the union leaders or their inability to understand the significance of the passing events and prepare consciously for the inevitable strike.
Unless this is remedied quickly, the magnificent fight of the workers will be diverted into pessimism and defeat for they must have correct leadership immediately to utilize the situation or various company moves will smash the movement.
 



AKRON, Ohio, Feb. 22. – A general strike movement was rapidly gaining impetus here to support 4,000 Goodyear strikers against armed vigilantes and hundreds of deputies who have announced their intention of using a sweeping injunction as an excuse to smash the picket line.
A progressive-dominated committee of fifteen was chosen by 300 cheering delegates at the Central Labor Union special meeting last night with full power to do “anything they advise to help the Goodyear strikers.”
The Goodyear strikers have ad-opted the slogan, “Hold that picket line injunction or no injunction,” issued by progressives and they prepared to resist any of the attacks which are being openly prepared by Sheriff Flower, a National Guard captain.
Already national guard observers have been sent in and troops have been told to be ready for immediate call.
Company union meetings have been packed by Goodrich and Firestone foremen, businessmen, supervisors and other rats, crying for “a right to go into the factory.”
Nearly 5,000 Goodyear workers refused to enter the plants even though promised protection and efforts are being made to swing their sympathy into active support.
 
Union Officials Timid
John House, union president, declared in the injunction hearing that the strike was an “outlaw”strike, thus giving an excuse for the granting of the injunction and reducing sympathy to the union. Pressure from progressives, backed by the rank and file, has forced House to change his stand a little.
The union officials were afraid to come out openly for demands as they hoped for quick settlement and want the men to go back to work as they fear facing a real strike.
But progressive pressure became too strong and the union has announced it wants to abolish the Flying squad, a company scab organization, the company union known a the Goodyear Industrial assembly, and no lay-offs.
Signs urging the 30-hour week, seniority rights and return of wages cut recently were made by picket captains and the union officials will have to ask for those demands too.
 
Strike Events to Date
Monday night the Plant Two workers decided to go on strike immediately as the company refused to rescind lay-offs. A picket line of 500 was formed despite sub-zero weather and a blizzard.
Tuesday the plant was shut tight by the pickets and many employees coming to work joined the strike movement.
A sit-down in key departments in Plant One was begun early Tuesday in sympathy with the strikers. A committee was sent to the union asking if the picket line should be formed.
Two police attempts to smash through the Plant Two line failed Tuesday as more workers joined with the strikers instead of trying to get in the factory.
By Wednesday morning, sixty picket lines were marching in chain fashion around entrances and Plant One and Three were closed by the ‘sit-downers’ who came out on strike. Militancy and determination to win despite all obstacles were marked features of the picket talk as the temperature dropped to nine below zero for two nights.
The union officials wouldn’t sanction a strike bulletin for Wednesday morning although hundreds of Goodyear workers were coming to the picket lines instead of going to work. No effort was made to win the non-strikers over primarily because the union officials feared a strike.
 
Combating Company Maneuvers
Valuable days were lost by not giving out statements to non-strikers and to the papers which kept howling for “reasons why the men are striking.” Unfavorable comment began to be heard on the streets but the mistake was corrected when key workers adopted completely a correct program which had been hammered home by militants.
Pickets took charge of traffic, closed liquor stores, and generally ran East Akron under direction of a special strike committee, all week.
A company trick of sneaking in scabs instead of office workers in the payroll department while workers were waiting for checks brought a complete stoppage of every movement in and out of the factory. Even the company president, P.W. Litchfield was kept within the plant along with 500 flying squad scabs who have tear gas bombs, clubs, gas masks, etc. to use tomorrow against the workers.
 
The First Setback
First break in the picket line came Friday night when a court order was given during the injunction hearing that coal be allowed hauled in by train. Strike captains had trouble restraining pickets from stopping the train as the company tried to provoke trouble so that the injunction would be given.
However, the company received the injunction easily as House and Zesiger flopped terribly in the court fight as progressives had said they would. The situation began to look dark for the strikers but the Central Labor union meeting was called just in time to rally the disheartened workers and put new lifeblood in the pickets.
 
CLU Gives Support
The resolution adopted unanimously by the CLU delegates bristled in defiance of any injunction proceedings and called on all organized and unorganized workers to support the strikers on the picket line and financially.
Other rubber workers locals officers met after the CLU meeting and planned support for Goodyear strikers. Already workers at Goodrich demanded that they be called out on strike.
Exactly as Goodyear’s strike was a spontaneous movement, so will all organized workers walk out even though certain local union leaders will beg them with crocodile tears in their eyes not to.
 



It is highly significant that precisely in that factory – Goodyear – where the company union is 17 years old and the rubber workers bona-fide union admittedly the weakest, that the strike in the rubber industry should begin! This happened because Goodyear workers were given absolutely no concessions but driven downward constantly, thus storing up an explosive force which blew up when the last sit-down provided the spark. Other rubber workers’ unions have obtained minor concessions and thus basic antagonisms were dulled.
The so-called objective economic factors involved have been pointed out in the New Militant previously and need only listing. Price wars, shifting the entire burden on the workers through wage cut, lengthening of hours, disregard of seniority rights favoring squadmen, who are nothing but company scab groups, in making unnecessary layoffs; these injustices have seared themselves in the workers’ minds. They provide the fire which has kept pickets warm despite 9 below zero weather.
 
Goodyear’s Fabulous Profits
Properly handled, the workers are unbeatable and support by everyone but big business is a foregone conclusion. Even a Federal fact-finding board has condemned Goodyear practices in wage cutting, etc., etc. To top that off, last Monday when the strike began, Goodyear announced an $800,000 increase in profit for 1935 over 1934. bringing its total admitted profit to $5,500,000, which fact alone rallied hundreds of incensed workers to the picket line.
Akron itself is composed of 35,000 rubber workers and their families. Add another 20,000 workers who are employed in subsidiary plants or other industrial plants and you can grasp the potential power of the workers when aroused for there are only 250,000 people altogether here. This is an over-sized mill town, in other words.
How is the rubber barons’ association trying to break the strike? In the cut-and-dried way. The perennial injunction which would abolish the picket line; the counter-demonstrations staged by the company union; full support of the bourgeois press which is doing its damndest to swing sympathy to the company; arming of hundreds of special deputies to break the picket line tomorrow; etc., etc.
In view of these facts, it would seem nearly incomprehensible that anyone would consider a possibility of defeat. But that would ignore exactly those factors which now have become the balance between victory and defeat – the union leadership.
 
The Progressives and Leadership
In the news report of this strike, you can see the details of the bungling job done by the union officials. That is the potential Achilles heel of the giant Labor. The no doubt sincere but incorrect policies of the leadership would have ruined the strike already if a group of progressives hadn’t emerged under pressure of events. Suffice it to say, that in so far as the strike has been placed on a class struggle basis has it been successful. The union leaders, while talking of class-consciousness, etc., etc., act in an impeccable class-collaborationist way which has been greeted with joy by the company.
For example, progressives insisted since Tuesday that the company would be given the injunction in its own money-dominated capitalist court and that plans to break the injunction were necessary. They have won the rank and file to that view, naturally for the average picket has been two miles ahead of the leader on every issue that arose. The union leaders hoped and prayed and declared time and again that the court couldn’t grant an injunction because this is a peaceful strike!
 
All Akron Will Reply
Since easily 2,000 rubber workers from other plants have aided the strikers on the picket line, spreading of the walkout throughout the entire industry will come as soon as the sheriff tries to slug his way into the factory no matter how much any union leaders plead to the contrary. In fact, Monday will probably see half of Akron’s rubber workers out at the picket lines ready to battle the sheriff, so strong is the sentiment for the strikers.
Quite obviously this strike is a make or break proposition for unionism in the tire industry. The companies have fully realized this. The rank and file has forced the union leaders to see it. Since this is a mass production industry capable and demanding of industrial unionism, both William Green and John Lewis are aware of the issues involved. So the center of the craft vs. industrial union fight within the A.F. of L. has been shifted to Akron.
Green took honors in round one by telephoning the international union officers of the United Rubber Workers of America that he would support them. Lewis has sent Adolph Germer and Leo Kryzycki. vice-president of the Amalgamated Clothing Workers, to the strike scene.
Already valuable lessons have been learned by the workers which will increase the power of the working class because of this struggle. After 21 years of complete terrorization by the companies, smashing of all attempts at strikes and unionism, the companies have been foiled in their attempts to curb the present walkout. The workers are learning their own strength. “No matter what Goodyear does, they can’t build tires without us,” the tire-builder says, determined he won’t go back until a good settlement is made and realizing the company can’t run without workers. That workers are the basis of all production. That profit is stolen from workers.

Every Aid Promised by Akron C.L.U. Committee
 



AKRON, Ohio. Feb. 10 – In a powerful display of organized strength that amazed and alarmed the tire companies, thousands of rubber workers joined in various spontaneous “sit-downs” at the Big Three plants here during the past two weeks which had serious possibility of spreading into an industry-wide strike until the workers’ demands were mainly met.
These “sit-downs” began at Firestone which involved 2,000 workers and brought complete victory of the union as explained in the previous issue of the New Militant.
The “sit-down” idea spread to Goodyear where another 2,000 workers supported the refusal of the tire-curing room to take a wage cut. Although the company failed to rescind the cut, they did not dare carry out a written order to spread the cut to plant 2 as the workers prepared to shut down the plant under leadership of the Goodyear local of the United Rubberworkers of America.
Then, tire-builders at Goodrich sat down Friday night, because one of the union men was not given a fair-wage allowance when he was transferred to another machine.
A tire-builders committee went from department to department rallying workers to their banner and thus entire production was stopped within an hour. This involved 1,500. Another shift came in at midnight and joined, doubling the number refusing to work.
A committee of two union men from each of the four shifts was selected by the workers to confer with the management. The company quickly agreed to give the worker his allowance and the men went back to work.
However, it was discovered that the company wasn’t going to pay any of the workers money for the time lost during the sit-down so the entire factory again quit work.
Threats by the company to forcibly move the workers from the plant were met with jeers and the police were defied. Although the plant normally is closed over Sunday the workers prepared to remain inside until their demand for half-pay was met.
When the company saw that the workers were going to keep the plant closed at all costs and would not let anyone work, it agreed to pay all the men except the tire-builders half-pay.
The tire-builders, to show that they were willing to sacrifice for the sake of fellow-workers, accepted the proposal but the other workers refused it for over two hours although union leaders urged them to accept.
The union committee was “tricked” into accepting the proposal and recommending it to the men, some of them said later, but not many were disturbed because it was seen that a mistake this time could and would be rectified in the near future.
During the entire time of the sit-down, active union members, enthused by the fight of their leaders in the negotiations, signed up hundreds of non-union men into the bona-fide union.
 
Union Grows After Struggle
The union at Goodyear grew after the sit-down but for just the opposite reason which brought the great increase of membership at Firestone and Goodrich locals.
Goodyear workers realized clearly that it was their lack of organization, of leadership that brought the tire-builders defeat. Failure of the union leadership itself to utilize the situation quickly enough also left the workers without confidence and so they went to work when the Goodyear company assembled its prize strike-breakers, the Flying Squadron to do the work.
They joined the union because together with the other union workers they make a solid front and so were able to plan a 100 per cent sit-down at plant 2 which the company was afraid of. That’s why the order to carry out a wage cut is still in the superintendent’s office and will remain there for a while.
Since both Goodrich and Firestone unionists and their leaders quickly stepped into the forefront of the sit-downs and led the workers to victory, hundreds joined the organizations for they have found an answer to the crying need of the rubber-workers – a militant trade union constantly fighting for the workers rights.
That the rubber workers would themselves take spontaneous action against the slow but steady depression of their living wage through various moves of the companies is thousand fold proof of our contention that the unions must show in action that they will lead the workers, for the workers are demanding action.
 
Causes of the “Sit-Downs”
The causes of the sit-downs cannot be found in the issues around which the recent skirmishes were fought. There have been wage cuts, longer hours, etc. introduced before in the factories without voluble protest. Union men have been layed-off before and not for just a week as the Firestone unionist whose case started the sit-down.
L.L. Callahan, Goodrich local president, correctly gave as the reason for the sit-downs the following statement.
“The whole thing in a nutshell is that the men have been overworked, overloaded and underpaid over a period of time to a breaking point. It has been reached now. Any incident will serve as the spark to set off an explosion.”
In other words, the sit-downs are significant as portraying the mood and temper of the rubber workers; as showing what working conditions and the drive of economic forces have done to their ideas.
The rapid spread of the sit-downs shows how a fighting slogan will be concretized by masses in motion and that the rubber workers are in motion.
This places squarely before the union leaders the responsibility of answering the fundamental demands of the workers and leading them in a battle for a real victory against the rubber barons who have been running everything their own way while Claherty previously was ruining the unions.
 
Workers Ready for Strike
Every avenue of thought arising from a study of the meaning of the sit-downs leads to the inescapable conclusion that the rubber workers not only are ready for but demand an industry-wide strike to break the continual drive against them by the companies.
There are no smooth-tongued Clahertys to divert the growing strike sentiment among the workers into the channels of betrayal and defeat this year.
Whether any individual union officer wants to continue the fight against the rubber companies, he will not have any chance to decide. The upswing of the workers will carry him along.
What is needed is conscious preparation for the strike so that the workers can have every advantage possible against their ruthless class enemies.
 

  SOUTH BEND, Ind., May 2. – A resurgence of the labor movement in the auto industry that has wide possibilities can be expected following the progressive actions taken here this week at the second convention of the United Automobile Workers of America. Similar in many respects to the rubber workers’ convention of last fall, the sessions brought forth many manifestations of what the thousands of auto workers are thinking, what unrest is sweeping through the factories and what course might be traveled in the coming period. A decisive victory against the stupid and criminal policies of William Green, A.F. of L. president, who defended craft unionism at the convention, marked the opening session. So well remembered were the two years of splitting, betrayal, autocratic control, and the other policies which nearly destroyed the labor movement in the auto industry for which Green and the majority of the executive board of the A.F. of L. were responsible, that the 215 delegates were unanimously opposed to Green’s appointed president, Francis J. Dillon.  Green and Dillon Trounced A lame defense by both Dillon and Green of their policies met with no sympathy or response. Every delegate was prepared to battle at any cost a continuation of the antiquated craft union policies. In face of such bitter opposition, Dillon and Green withdrew while the delegates cheered and cheered. The two men left repudiated, disgraced, failures in their effort to organize the auto industry because of their false policies. It was highly significant that Green and Dillon made such a serious retreat, one that further impairs the already badly damaged reputation of the craft union dominated executive board of the A.F. of L. It indicates that their position has become so weak among workers in basic industry that they fear to make a fight for it! Jubilant progressives and the other delegates shouted and cheered in a wild scene of enthusiasm as Homer Martin, vice-president, took the platform to act as temporary chairman. The union had won its autonomy!  Tasks Before the Convention Two major tasks confronted the convention after the retreat of Green and Dillon; adoption of a progressive program which would afford a basis for building a powerful union and the selection of good leaders to carry out that program. A program had been drawn up by a caucus of 140 delegates held a month previous to the convention. A steering committee of 12 was chosen at that time to lead the fight for its approval. The program of this essentially progressive bloc who were advised by the Committee for Industrial Organization included: (1) the ending of the probationary period of the union with Dillon as president; (2) establishment of an industrial union within the confines of the A.F. of L. with the jurisdictional question to be carried to the A.F. of L. convention; (3) amalgamation of the independent unions such as the M.E.S.A. and the former Coughlinite-influenced union with the United Automobile Workers; (4) approval of a democratic constitution allowing all political liberties to membership; (5) and the Gorman Labor Party resolution which the Stalinists naturally had foisted upon the delegates; (6) an immediate organization drive. The program carried in its entirety. Without an understanding of how each issue was carried, however, the program lacks much content in so far as accurate analysis is concerned. The seating of the 37 militant Toledo delegates was the first question considered. Since the Dillon opposition was the main problem and he had left the convention, these delegates had little difficulty in obtaining recognition. Dillon had claimed Toledo had no charter and was an outlaw union since it refused last fall to bust the powerful union of 16 plants into separate locals. It had paid up its delinquent per-capita tax. Although nearly all the delegates acted in a progressive manner by opposing the previous craft union minded administration, the second test of their development showed definite weaknesses which can not be ignored.  Election of Officials So strong was the desire of many delegates including the progressives to obtain offices that instead of fighting out differences on basic issues and then electing men on their stand, it was decided by the steering committee that election of officers should come first. Martin, a compromise selection of the progressives, was chosen president. Previously Wyndham Mortimer, of Cleveland, one of the strongest leaders of the progressives, was favored as candidate. He became first vice-president. Ed Hall, secretary-treasurer, although bitterly opposed by progressives from his own territory, Wisconsin, was given second vice-presidency, in a deal. Wells, of Detroit, known as a middle-of-the-road man, became third vice president, and George Addes, of Toledo, by no means a thorough progressive, was chosen secretary-treasurer. The caliber of the officers is very reminiscent of the rubber workers’ officials selected last fall. Only the test of a class struggle will show clearly where each stands. Some of the rubber worker progressives turned reactionary in the Goodyear strike.  The Red Scare A company-inspired red scare through issuance of a fake leaflet branding Martin and Mortimer as “communists” did not affect the elections. In bitterness over the election results, reactionary delegates introduced a resolution to expel all known “communists” from the convention. A two-hour debate ensued with militant Socialist delegates taking the best stand and putting up the strongest opposition to the resolution. Instead of fighting the battle to a finish and defeating the resolution once and for all, the progressive forces passed a motion to refer it back to the constitutional committee where it was forgotten. In that connection, a speech by Rose Pesotta, of the International Ladies Garment Workers Union, speaking as a guest that afternoon, spiked the reactionaries on the red scare. She gave an eloquent plea for political democracy in unions which was cheered by virtually everyone. After her talk the issue never came to the surface again.  Flays Craft Union Regime Then came the memorable speech of Richard Frankensteen, an observer for the independent industrial union which Coughlin had influenced. He scathingly denounced the craft union policies of the Green regime. He criticized the ignorant attacks of many labor papers against his union pointing out that at no time in the past two years had any attempt been made by the A.F. of L. or any group to bring them into the federation. He declared the A.F. of L. conduct in the Motor Products strike where Dillon led scabs into the factory under the A.F. of L. banner a disgrace to unionism. Then he made a stirring plea for unity and pledged to bring the union into the autonomous United Automobile Workers while the delegates gave him a tremendous ovation. Anderson of the M.E.S.A. likewise took a similar stand in his talk. It was clearly established that two main ideas were in the auto workers’ minds – an expression of what the thousands of workers in the huge factories think. Those were UNITY of all unions under the banner of INDUSTRIAL UNIONISM.  Unity Probable Soon Immediate plans for amalgamation including the seating of an independent union leader on the general executive board were made. It is therefore highly probable that unity will be established among the auto workers. In this matter the Committee for Industrial Organization was praised by Frankensteen and Anderson. Frankensteen openly declared that the discussions with the C.I.O. representatives, Adolph Germer and others, had brought them to the unity position. It can be said generally that the C.I.O., because of the very nature of the problems confronting the auto workers, played a more progressive role than in the Goodyear strike where more basic questions were confronted.  Labor Party Resolution However, the credit for much of the progress made must be given to the active group of young militant Socialists. They supported and fought for every point of the program previously mentioned both in numerous caucus meetings and on the convention floor, except the Labor Party resolution and that deserves special mention. Although Stalinist-influenced progressives expected a hitter fight and considerable doubt was entertained about the passing of the Gorman resolution, the resolution was supported without any voice of opposition, without any debate. (Since the writing of this article the press reported the carrying of a resolution endorsing Roosevelt for re-election. This motion was put and passed as a rider to the resolution urging the formation of a Farmer-Labor party following a speech by President Homer Martin, who appealed to the delegates not to cross the C.I.O. which is definitely committed to back Roosevelt in 1936. – Ed.) It seemed that no one except the Stalinists took the resolution seriously. The S.P. delegates appeared confused in their position and some voted for and others apparently abstained from voting.  A Significant Observation As a Toledo delegate remarked after the vote: “What we are vitally interested in is building a powerful progressive industrial union. The Labor Party isn’t going to help. If we can bring in 450,000 auto workers after a real struggle against the auto magnates that will mean something to the workers.” As a matter of fact, a careful survey led this writer to the opinion expressed above that the auto workers are a hundred-fold more interested in building a union by direct class struggle than in any Labor Party. It hardly need be pointed out that such a struggle for elementary rights will necessarily take on revolutionary aspects because of the forces against which the workers battle. Many of the militants appeared to realize this too, and expressed that opinion. The delegates have no illusions about the ferocity of the struggle that will he waged against them. Speaker after speaker told of the spy-systems, the intimidation, the blacklists and other weapons brought into play to crush unionism. But the great advance of the United Rubber Workers left a definite impression and built up a new determination in the auto workers. “If the Goodyear strikers did that much, we can do the same,” a Detroit delegate said. It was in that temper that the delegates adjourned, returning to the 40,000 workers they represent to begin an intensive organization drive backed by the C.I.O. to unionize the 450,000 auto workers. However a speech by Charles P. Howard, secretary of the C.I.O., and president of the Typographical union, indicated the limitations such aid would take. “We believe that the worker should obtain more of a share of the product produced. The automobile workers deserve higher wages. We must fight to maintain the American standard of living to give us continued life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness. The employer must learn it is good business to pay higher wages ...” Howard said, at a mass meeting. Support of Roosevelt also was urged. In other words, a class collaboration policy will be pursued by the C.I.O. when obviously only the most militant struggle can bring any victory, as the Goodyear strike proved. In conclusion, it must be said that the number of young militants at the convention offered real hope that the United Automobile Workers would base their fight for unionism on a class struggle policy. In clashing with the powerful auto magnates only such a policy offers the correct program for victory. As in the rubber strike, irrespective of any particular leader or groups of leaders, future battles in the auto industry will assume such magnitude and the auto workers such a militancy that one can safely predict the development of cadres of class-conscious, revolutionary-minded militants by the very nature of the struggle.   


AKRON, Ohio, Jan. 7 – Even a government fact finding hoard in the rubber industry was forced to criticize policies of the rubber barons which have brought layoffs, longer work hours and less pay for rubber workers, as indicated in a report released by the labor department this week.
The report showed that every warning printed in the New Militant three months ago telling of the plans of the rubber companies to lower real wages so that a tire price war would be paid for by workers were correct in every respect.
The board which worked under the direction of Frances Perkins, labor secretary, made its finding specifically against the Goodyear tire company which returned to an 8-hour day last fall after having been forced on a six-hour day in 1930.
 
Nationwide in Scope
That this move was part of a nationwide employer drive against workers as we pointed out long ago, the board admitted in saying, “the opinion appears to prevail that if Goodyear with its large production capacity lengthens hours, other tire manufacturers will follow a similar course.”
The board, which was naturally conservative in its findings, declared that, “an average of 36 hours per week would mean reducing the working forces by approximately12 per cent.” Actually a 40-hour week work prevails so it can safely be said that at least 15 per cent of Goodyear’s 15,000 employees have been layed-off permanently!
The basic reason for these offensives against the already poor standard of living of the workers can be extracted from a single paragraph hidden in the middle of the 99-page report.
It reads:
“Goodyear management states to the board that one of the motives in changing from six to eight hours is to effect a reduction in costs. This objective appears to be to increase income. It would be better to approach such a problem from the standpoint of marketing methods and elimination of price-cutting warfare than by decreasing wage rates and increasing hours per day of workers.”
 
Workers Shoulder Costs
The relentless forces of competition drive rubber companies to gain market control at any cost and this cost has been thrown on the workers every time. Since the rubber industry has been in a growing state of decline along with industry in general under capitalism, it has been wracked by tire price wars of increasing intensity in the past ten years.
That this war will continue in the future in even greater intensity is an indisputed fact as shown by the report from Detroit this week that DuPonts have ordered the United States Rubber Co. to break the temporary price agreement in an effort to take markets away from Goodyear, Goodrich and Firestone.
Facing these facts squarely and constantly explaining them to the rubber workers is an elementary duty of the United Rubber Workers officials for only as more workers realize that they can fight the companies best through the bona-fide unions will the unions grow.
The ills of the rubber industry can be cured permanently only by removing the basic cause of them, which is capitalistic control for profit instead of workers’ controlled industry for use.
 

  AKRON, Ohio, Jan. 31. – Fear that a virtual strike of 2,500 workers since Tuesday noon would spread throughout its plants caused the Firestone tire company here to accede suddenly to union demands today and brought complete victory to rubber workers in their first major open clash with the company. The immediate issue which incensed workers and led to the refusal to operate their machines Tuesday was the lay-off for a week of a unionist, Clay Dick, because he had a scrap with a “pace” maker of his department one night outside the plant. It was the spark that flamed into open defiance the smouldering resentment of workers which has increased in bitterness during the past two mouths as speed-up attempts and wage cuts made inroads into the plant. Tire-builders in Dept. 16-b and17-b who are the heart of the production system, spontaneously without any leadership sat down at their machines, stopping all production of tires until the unionist was reinstated.  Workers Sit Tight The mass protest caught both tire company and the union leaders unawares. When shift changing time came at 6 p.m. and the workers refused to leave the factory, word was passed around of the seriousness of the situation. Night workers coming to the plant joined in the movement and likewise sat down at the tire-building machines. Meanwhile, the milling rooms, and other departments whose work leads up to the actual building of the tires were forced to shutdown. The effect of the action is comparable to the effect of the closing of the Toledo Chevrolet transmission plant last spring which bottled up all motor production by that company. The 2,500 workers sat down at the machines in two twelve-hour shifts, keeping anyone else from touching them. Women in nearby departments joined the movement.  Company Tries Obstinacy Of course, the company scorned even talking to a union committee at first. They also gave Sherman Dalrymple, United Rubber Workers president, a runaround. But as the workers stood firm, united 100 percent, with non-unionists and unionists in solid agreement, and as workers in plant 2 began talking of a “sitdown” the company shifted its position. It met with the workers committee but flatly refused to consider reinstatement of the unionist. The union was just as tough in its refusal to tell the men to return to work until the issue was settled. So the union prepared to keep the workers in the factory during the weekend, meanwhile calling a general meeting Sunday afternoon to consider what action to take. Naturally, considerable agitation for closing the entire plant and pulling a bona-fide strike began to develop ... and the company doesn’t have its spring replacement tires produced yet.  Force Wages for “Strike” Thus the company was forced to agree to reinstate the unionist, although it made its proposition to the union secretary rather than the union committee as a whole in an effort to save its face. Not only that, but the company agreed to pay every worker who sat down at his machine half of his wages during the entire cessation of work! Obviously this was to placate the hard feelings of the workers towards this autocratically-run company. The victory brought additional results within a day. Over 100 workers rejoined the union. The “pace” maker who precipitated the struggle was a company pet sent into the department to build a higher number of tires than the average so that the company could introduce another wage cut by demanding higher average production. This is the typical form of company anti-labor activities in departments. * * *  Bulletin by Jack Wilson AKRON, Ohio, Feb. 1 – Quickly adopting the successful strategy of Firestone workers, pitmen and tire-builders at Goodyear sat down at their jobs last night in protest against a 10 percent wage cut Over 250 pitmen started the shutdown that paralyzed all tire production and brought 2,000 workers to their banner within a few hours. Again the movement was spontaneous! A “rank and file” committee elected by the workers met with Fred Climer, personnel manager, and H.T. Gillan, production superintendent, but refused to go back to work pending settlement. The company retaliated by closing the gates to workers coming in at the midnight shift throwing the main parts of the huge factory into darkness. The Goodyear local shop committee was to meet today to decide the course of the United Rubber Workers. Strong demand that the union lead a Goodyear-wide strike which would involve 15,000 workers is expected to be made.   


The CIO pressure against General Motors corporation increased heavily this week with the rejection of President Truman’s strike-breaking proposals and with the fresh threat of a nation-wide steel strike.
Any hope General Motors had last week of smashing the strike was dashed to pieces when the UAW ranks and leadership stood firmly against President Truman’s strike-breaking move.
The knowledge of this union solidarity forced General Motors to retreat somewhat from its arrogant attitude and to renew negotiations.
Continued negotiations with the Ford Motor Company also offered a possibility that the UAW would make a dent in the industrialists’ united front against the UAW demands for a living wage for the auto workers.
In announcing January 14 as a strike date deadline unless wage demands were met satisfactorily, the United Steelworkers of America-CIO placed the power of 700,000 steel workers into the battle against the Wall Street corporations.
A contribution of $100,000 was given to the UAW strike fund by the USA policy committee, emphasizing the close relationship between the unions and their struggle.
The steel union’s rejection of President Truman’s proposals, as well as the attack of all organized labor on his congressional program, gave further strength to the position of the UAW strikers this week.
Instead of backing the strike wholeheartedly as he did in 1937, John L. Lewis took the present opportunity to cast doubts on the wisdom of a strike now, although he likewise blasted the Truman program.
 
Men Are Firm
Among the GM strikers confidence remained high as a result of these major developments and a series of mass demonstrations took place over the weekend reminiscent of the good old days. Mass picketing was employed in a one-day demonstration in Detroit. Elsewhere, parades were held by the strikers.
In the midst of these favorable developments, the proposal of the UAW leadership to give the Ford Motor Company “security” represented a serious retreat that can have repercussions in GM.
No sooner did GM hear of this unprecedented concession to Ford than it canceled its contract with the UAW , until a similar concession was given it.
The UAW leaders’ proposal to Ford – and the whole UAW leadership supported it – provides the company with a weapon against union militants in the shop and weakens the union, even though the check-off and full union recognition accompany it. The power of Ford to fire unionists without union intercession endangers the position of the shop stewards.
Unable to defeat the UAW on the picket lines, and this is a real tribute to the power of the strikers, the auto companies are forced into flank attacks against the UAW. They want to accomplish in negotiations what was impossible on the streets: weaken the union.
However, the UAW ranks time and again have stood as a powerful corrective force to any would-be maneuvers or blunders of the leadership. The voice of the ranks will be decisive again.
 



Just before the opening of the hearings in Washington this week by President Truman’s Fact-Finding Board on the auto strike, General Motors made public its full program for settling the strike.
This program constitutes a grave indictment of GM and the entire system of which it is such an important part. For GM openly advocates a return to the Hoover days of wage cuts, depressions, speed-up, union-busting and economic chaos.
It isn’t strange either that not a single big newspaper, which has moaned loudly about the “unreasonableness” of labor, has a word to say about the GM program, which would guarantee industrial anarchy and depression.
GM demands the open shop, the approval of the speed-up, the elimination of the maintenance of union membership, “security” measures, a specific guarantee of the “rights and prerogatives of management” and an “anti-vilification” agreement.
GM also demands that “wages, hours of employment and other conditions of employment are the ONLY matters which are subject to collective bargaining.”
This last demand has been a major point of dispute during the strike because the UAW has proved time and again that wages can be discussed seriously only in connection with PRICES and PROFITS.
The UAW has insisted that GM OPEN ITS BOOKS so that the UAW and, the consumers know exactly what wages can be paid and what prices should be marked for GM autos. Unless these factors are taken into account, GM could pass any wage boost to the consumers, and thus rob the auto workers on the market through prices as well as in the shop on wages.
 
UAW and the People
By now large sections of the people, as well as the auto workers themselves, have become convinced that wages can be discussed seriously only in connection with prices and profits. The UAW won much sympathy in the GM strike struggle precisely because it hammered home this point. Now GM wants the UAW to surrender this excellent program which placed the corporation in an obviously vulnerable position.
Likewise, GM is terribly anxious to avoid having a public inspection of its books, for contained therein is the full story of the fabulous war profits of this corporation.
The UAW challenges the theory of “free enterprise” by making this demand, for it has learned that the functioning of the economic system is a matter of national concern and not just the private property of a handful of powerful industrialists like the du Ponts.
GM puts its demand for an open shop in this fine language: “The union and the corporation shall recognize the rights of the employees and applicants for employment to elect or refuse membership in any union, to maintain or resign from such union ...” etc. Of course, this is the old technique of divide and rule, which GM wants to place into operation.
Combine this proposal with the one asking for “security” measures against union militants and shop stewards, and for recognition of the “rights and prerogatives of management to fire and hire” and we see the full-scale plan of GM to smash the union as an independent Organization of workers within a plant. Or, more exactly, to turn it into a company union! For under the GM proposals the shop stewards would have no power, union militants protesting policy would be subject to immediate discharge and the straw bosses would reign supreme within the shops.
 
For a New Speed-Up
The reason for these proposals is clear from another infamous demand: “That the international union will withdraw objection to local unions negotiating and agreeing to pay-plans which provide for rewarding individuals for increased productive effort.”
This is fancy language for the speed-up. GM wants the UAW to agree to the speed-up! Every auto worker knows what this means. There is incentive pay for increased production. Then comes the inevitable cut in rates, and an auto worker finds himself doing twice the work for the same meager pay. The whole history of the auto industry is a struggle of the auto workers against the injustices of this brutal system.
Since the UAW provides some protection against this system of wage slavery, GM wants to break it or turn it into a company union. Otherwise, its chance of making more fantastically high profits is jeopardized when the worker in the shop is protected partially from more intensified exploitation by his union.
The final and insidious demand of GM is that “the union will make good its pledge to eliminate personal attacks, false accusations and vilification of management through official union publications, handbills,” etc. This is a TOTALITARIAN DEMAND.
GM knows that it is very well protected by its courts and the laws of the land from slander and libel. This is not involved in the present demand. What GM wants is the UAW leadership to play cop for it within the union movement. It wants the UAW to agree to a suppression of FREEDOM OF SPEECH AND OF PRESS. For example, union members call C.E. Wilson a rich, arrogant, ruthless, power-mad capitalist.
This is an accurate, description. But C.E. Wilson considers that a “vilification.” if he had his way, any union member talking like that would be thrown out. But as a matter of principle, any union man has a right to his own views about management and to express those views. C.E. Wilson wants GM workers to be allowed to refer to him Only as a “noble industrial statesman and citizen.” Thus we see American industry seeking to introduce the identical methods of the Hitler regime to control the thought and speech of everyone everywhere.
From beginning to end the GM proposals illustrate only one thing: the utter bankruptcy of monopoly capitalists to solve the problems of the day. The program of this ruling class in the United States is totally reactionary and can bring only depression and chaos.
There was only one GM plant where the du Ponts and Wilson carried out their program in full, one place where they had speed-up, an open shop and no criticism of management. That was the GM plant in NAZI GERMANY. Just as GM is turning to politics calculated to bring that condition in America, so the UAW must turn to politics guaranteed to block this road to fascism. The UAW has to reject the GM demands on the economic front. The UAW must enter the political scene to put a WORKERS’ GOVERNMENT into power to stop fascism and to solve its economic problems. There is no other choice. The present strike is only the first battle in this war.
 



Bill Mauldin gave one overwhelming impression of the American Legion convention in his report appearing in the current issue of Life magazine.
An enlisted man would have felt about as much at home there as he would in an officers’ club.
“During the big banquet the last evening of the convention, the speakers table looked like a page out of Who’s Who. Among those present were Generals Doolittle, Vandegrift and Bradley, the president of the American Bankers Association and some governors. World War II’s only spokesmen were its brass hats.”
Mauldin knows, of course, that the American Legion was organized originally by the Brass Hats precisely so the War Department could keep a grip on the veterans, and speak in their name. This has not changed today.
 
The Legion and Demobilization
Take something as vital to the soldier of this last war as demobilization. A pretty fair test of any veteran’s organization is the question: “Where did it stand on getting the boys home and out quickly?” Naturally, the American Legion did not back the enlisted men in their demand to speed up demobilization, and also to cut out the horrible favoritism which has appeared. It is a stooge of the War Department on those matters.
Take another problem. In Mail Call in Yank magazine, we used to read always that most of the soldiers wanted an organization “of the veterans, by the veterans and for the veterans.” The American Legion failed to meet this test too.
“Only two World War II vets were elected to a high national post (vice-commander) and if one of them wasn’t also a veteran of World War I he was old enough to be one,” Mauldin reported. Where are the enlisted men? Has an enlisted man ever held the post of national commander? Not many of them have. Why not?
The American Legion is a powerful business and political institution, with a treasury of at least $15,000,000. (It claims a wealth in property of $200,000,000.) Its backbone has been local, state and national politicians who have wormed their way into lucrative government jobs as “veterans”, and by the club of the “veterans vote.”
In order to keep this bureaucratic privilege, the political clique that dominates the Legion needs more power, that is, more “veterans’ votes.” That is why it puts on such a tremendous campaign for recruiting veterans of this war.
But perpetuation of the American Legion is more than a matter of keeping the gravy jobs for certain individuals. It is, above all, a way of controlling the political power of an important segment of the American people, the veterans. Every GI knows this fact.
 
No Posts for the Enlisted Man
The Legion leadership tries to conceal this fact by a pompous claim: “You can take the Legion over and run it.” So said retired Commander Edward N. Scheiberling, big-shot lawyer. But how were the 650,000 vets of this war, which the Legion claims, treated? They didn’t get a peek into the powerful committees and posts at this convention. They have only token representation, as Mauldin pointed out – like one of those officer-enlisted man joint committees in the Army: one colonel, two majors, a few junior officers and a couple of enlisted men (who, if they had any savvy, kept their mouths shut).
Take another angle. The biggest immediate headache of most veterans is a place to live. It is just TS on that in most cities. What did the American Legion do about that acute problem?
Decent jobs at good pay? The president of the American Bankers Association wasn’t worried about that at the convention. Nor was ex-Governor John Stelle of Illinois, newly-elected national commander.
These questions are all connected with who runs the Legion. Mauldin said a mouthful on that, too. “Too many of them seem to feel that our numbers will add a lot of weight to their outfit and a great deal of prestige, and they will be glad to have us take over eventually – but first they seem to want to ride herd a little bit, to make sure we don’t get any funny ideas.” The funny ideas of such things as good housing, decent jobs and high pay.
The American Legion, of course, took its place alongside the War Department on the unification of the armed forces, on compulsory military training, on keeping the atomic bomb a secret and in just about everything else the brass hats wanted.
The GI’s took enough from the brass hats during the war so that they would be fools to join a brass hat organization to support their ideas, and perpetuate their power and their clique in politics. It is a tragedy that the labor movement hasn’t organized or assisted in the organization of a real vet outfit. Meanwhile the Legion welcomes labor veterans as a nice “left cover.” To be sure, it means the Legion has to be a little more subtle in its anti-union propaganda, but there is a price to everything.
We don’t have to make a point of the fact that Mauldin didn’t join the Legion, after studying the convention.
 
Troops Stranded While Ships Load Munitions Against Java
One reason our troops are not being shipped home as fast as promised is that between 400 and 600 American vessels are being used to deliver arms and munitions to the anti-democratic forces in Java. Some 350 GI’s aboard the A.B. Hammond en route home to the states were “bumped off” in New Guinea and munitions loaded on instead. Thirty-nine of the forty-one crew members, supported by crews of three other ships in the Batavia (Java) harbor have sent a petition to a number of Congressmen. What angers these seamen still more is that Admiral Emory S. Land, War Shipping Administrator, recently sent a message to all U.S. merchant ships asking crews to stick to their jobs during the great task of getting Yanks home.
Admiral Land, who revealed HIS understanding of democracy by proposing some years ago that all union organizers be shot, knows what’s happening to American shipping in the Dutch East Indies. And he knows that he isn’t running guns to the Dutch and British on his own. The Truman Administration is responsible for this sabotaging of the homeward transportation of American troops and sabotaging the Javanese people’s fight for independence.
 



Soon after Russia denounced its neutrality pact with Japan, Washington imposed a radio and press censorship on the subject of Russia’s role in the Pacific war. Viewed in that context the article on China by Harold Isaacs in a recent issue of Newsweek assumes a significant as well as sensational character. For every diplomat in Washington knows that both the timing of its appearance as well as its contents were approved by the War Department.
The timing coincided with the expected arrival of Molotov, just before the San Francisco Conference. The content of the article speaks for itself. The fact that the War Department permits publication of an article by a newspaperman whose views are well known in Chungking and Moscow serves to emphasize the attention it is expected to attract.
When the article outlines China’s “bitter fiasco,” it is not news to the well-informed. “December 7, 1941, was China’s Armistice Day with Japan” is a worn-out cliché in American military circles.
But when the article breaks through the silence imposed on the Russian question in the Pacific and States baldly, “If the Russians, entering the China picture, decide to back the Communists, the stage is set for the first obscure battles of the next world war,” this is sensational. For it is the War Department speaking its warning, Moscow knows that, just as it knows who permitted earlier articles in the Army and Navy Journal needling Russia on the eastern front stalemate of a few months ago.
 
Pacific Realpolitik
The question of realpolitik in the Pacific is posed likewise. “Will the United States undertake to send a major expeditionary force of its own into China or will it leave the fighting there to the Russians?” More accurately, the question is: Will we have to go through with the grandiose plans for the Pacific which everyone – certainly the Russians – knows we are beginning?
“The target now is the Japanese homeland itself," writes Isaacs. An open secret. But that doesn’t end the war, or rather, doesn’t complete American plans in the Pacific. It only begins them. Admiral Halsey’s article in the current Collier’s outlines them – as well as indicating the contempt for civilian government expressed therein.
Here is how the strategic picture stacks up in the Pacific, the explanation as to the “why” of the sudden discussion on Russia in the Pacific war only two weeks after the censorship was clamped down.
The war against Japan enters its fourth year with everything in America’s favor. The tremendous gains against the Japanese are bringing the war to its climax. This, with only a partial employment of American military power against Japan. No need to recount the gains achieved. The last major preliminary for the knockout blows is the Okinawa operation. This campaign reveals fully the glaring weakness of Japan’s war machine. Last week Admiral Nimitz announced around 9,500 Japanese killed as against a total of 8,500 or so American casualties, the implication being that the cost in the future battles against Japan would be so great that fullest war effort, vast manpower requirements, etc., were necessary. The “line” is one of pessimism.
 
Japanese Losses
But a more careful reading of the casualty statistics tells a different story. The American casualties included Navy looses. The Japanese casualties were those of its land forces alone. Subsequently Nimitz, announced 100 Japanese ships were sunk in the “Okinawa period” and over 2,500 planes were destroyed. Take these total losses and compare them to total American losses and the figures are nearer 25,000 Japanese to 8,500 Americans. In military terms, this is a stupendous loss for Japan. Ordinarily, an invader loses two to one. Two conclusions follow: American military communiqués are presented primarily for political effect, not as accurate military appraisals. Secondly, an invasion of the homeland is assured of victory.
The explanation, of course, rests in the quantitative and qualitative differences between the war machines, each reflecting the industrial potential of the country. In simplest military language, Japan’s fantastic losses are caused by the devastatingly superior firepower of its opponent. Only one of America’s Pacific fleets and a small portion of its land forces are winning a battle whose strategic importance can hardly be over-estimated. Meanwhile, of course, other fleets and forces rehearse the D-Day of the Pacific.
Japan’s use of “suicide squads” in the air and on the sea is not an indication of strength. Rather, it shows that Japan is down to its last resources. Japanese sea power is broken. It retains a diversionary power, but it is totally discounted as a major factor. Japanese air power will soon face the same doom. In six months 1,000-plane daily raids on Japanese home islands and key centers will be routine. Even, now, each large B-29 raid has the same weight as 1,000 B-17’s!
In land fighting, Japan has achieved its Cassinos, as, for example, at Iwo, and on land in Okinawa. But, even here, losses are in reverse of the ordinary military calculations. Two to one for the defender instead of for the invader. In large-scale battles, even Cassinos aren’t possible, as demonstrated in the Philippine campaign.
On the Japanese homeland, full employment of armored forces, artillery, tactical air forces, as well as strategic bombing, doom Japan to a disastrous military defeat, greater even than that of Germany. The Japanese air force is not the Luftwaffe in any respect. Nor is its army comparable to the Wehrmacht.
 
Russia’s Role
Put in terms of statistics, as the military does, a cost of 500,000 American casualties guarantees the total defeat of Japan. Such a loss is the maximum required to exterminate the Japanese military machine. This figure might be much lower. Already Japan has suffered over 100,000 casualties on its mainland from the bombings.
A figure of 1,000,000 Japanese killed in the next six months by wiping out their cities is not too high. The blood bath in the Pacific is going to be sickening.
Therefore, the big question in the Pacific, in the calculations of the military, Is Russia. The publication of the Isaacs article is a diplomatic way for the world to be informed of it.
While Isaacs only poses certain questions, some answers can be indicated. Russia is already backing the Chinese Communists. The jockeying for position in the next world war has already begun, as is evidenced by the Polish controversy. Naturally, there will be a Yalta for the Pacific as there was for Europe. How else can “public opinion” be satisfied? It will mean no more for the Pacific than it does in Europe today.
 



So General Marshall NOW blandly admits that the charges and criticisms about American tanks were correct! In addition, he now admits that two other basic items of German quipment were superior to American: one, the 88 mm. gun and the other, the smokeless, flashless powder, so vital in concealing firing positions.
The utter contempt which the brass hats have for the intelligence of the American soldier is expressed in Marshall’s brazen excuse for covering up these serious deficiencies! It was necessary, says Marshall, to maintain the confidence of the American soldiers in his weapons! The German Tiger tanks were superior in duels with the Sherman tanks. All the courage in the world would not make up the difference. American soldiers were needlessly dying and they knew it. What was. Marshall’s solution then? A statement of confidence in the Sherman tank issued by General George S. Patton, who, to be sure, never fought in one.
A second argument, equally false, was used by Marshall to justify the War Department’s lies about the tank and other equipment: You couldn’t afford to give the enemy knowledge of what weapons, were doing the most damage. As though the German intelligence did not know that. As though they had not read the articles published in Stars and Stripes.
The truth of the matter is that there was only one portion of the world which did not know these ABC facts. It was the American people. And the reason the facts were suppressed from the people was to maintain the myth of brass-hat invincibility and to keep secure the prestige of the military bureaucracy.
Peacetime armies tend to have all of the vices and none of the so-called virtues of wartime armies. After all, there are more important things than Army regulations and Army red tape to dominate the life of an army in wartime. There are battles to be fought and won.
In peacetime the dead hand of routine grips the Army from top to bottom. It is the most conservative of all institutions. Armies always prepare to fight the former war. Only drastic political changes bringing sharp cleavages in the army itself provide some fresh air in this deadening atmosphere.
In the proposed American peacetime army there is lip service to technological advances which force themselves on every military system, but nothing is offered to counteract the deadly mental paralysis which is inherent in peacetime armies.
Marshall’s proposal for a small professional army as the bulwark of military strength is ambiguous because the General is fishing for a bigger catch. One day the War Department says it desires an army of 400,000 and the next day the’ Air Corps demands 600,000 for itself alone. But more important than numbers is the kind of army!
 
What Kind of Army?
This question, the kind of army, is decisive. Already the question is answered by the present tendencies in the armed forces. Thousands of officers are seeking to remain in the Army. Why? Not because they are interested in a professional career, but because they have the softest job they ever can hope to find in their lives. The privileges of rank and lack of social responsibility have bought them body and soul. Among the handful of enlisted men rejoining the Army the same tendency is evident. The high grade non-commissioned officers are re-enlisting. The money and the petty privileges are what attract them.
The Army admits it has no attraction for the millions of citizens who served in its ranks during the past five years. Most of them hate the Army. And in this hatred of the present Army we see the kind of Army that it really is, and will be, if Marshall’s proposals are adopted.
The present Army has a totalitarian regime in which the brass hats are supreme. The court-martial system and the Articles of War are the basis of a terrible system of injustice that have no place in an army claiming to serve democratic goals.
Enlisted men are guilty until proved innocent, while officers are innocent until proved guilty. For minor infractions the enlisted men obtain heavy sentences, but the officers’ clique fights to defend its members, irrespective of how grave the crime of the offender.
There is no trial by jury for the enlisted men. The deadly red tape, the antiquated training, the stultifying atmosphere of garrison life – every feature of army life which the citizen-soldier found repugnant to his democratic beliefs and formed-the basis for his hatred of the Army – are to be retained under the Marshall proposals.
 
A Bureaucratic Cancer
The professional army in. reality is a bureaucratic cancer eating at the democratic rights and-ideals of the people and living off the fat of the land, meanwhile serving as the threat of armed force against the labor and progressive movements. Between Marshall’s proposed army and a people’s army, democratic in its nature as well as purpose, there is a gulf as wide as the distinction between, dictatorship and democracy.
All of the speculation about atomic warfare and the insistence on an armament race are simply a rehash of the military propaganda used after World War I. Then it was poison gas which threatened the existence of mankind. As a matter of fact, the failure to use gas was not inspired by moral grounds, but because both the creator of Dachau and the users of the atomic bomb feared retaliation and political consequences. In the use of the atomic bomb these factors will be as decisive in the future as they were for poison gas in the past.
The American war leaders fought as long as possible against the introduction of airpower. General Billy Mitchell was even court-martialed for advocating it. The atomic bomb development was primarily a civilian project. Even now, the Army is demanding a large ground force, and the Navy a large complement of battleships and other obsolete vessels. The Air Force seeks to maintain its strength, which can be done only by keeping vast fleets of outmoded planes. In each case the impelling urge is the drive to maintain the status quo, which means plenty of rank, prestige and privileges for the incumbent bureaucracy.
The Marshall report does not dare touch on this problem, especially as it reflects itself organizationally. A unified military service is an ABC requirement. Yet the vested interests of the cliques in the Army, Navy and Air Force maneuver around this question today, not from the viewpoint of what is a military requirement, but rather, what is in their selfish interests.
(Article Three will appear next week)
 



Compulsory military training is the key question around which the entire Marshall document revolves. For everything in his military program rests on acceptance or rejection of this fundamental issue. Unless the brass hats can find a way to force its adoption, the peacetime army will not be the big instrument of class power and foreign policy contemplated by Marshall and his colleagues.
The American General Staff finally has come around to a public recognition of the profound truth of Von Clausewitz’s dictum, “War is a continuation of politics by other [i.e., forcible] means.” Marshall even misquotes the German theoretician to that effect. And this same criterion is applied to the question of military training.
“The timing of our decision on the question of military training is urgent. The officials of the State Department have been strongly of the opinion that a decision in this matter prior to the final peace negotiations would greatly strengthen the hand of the United States in securing acceptance of genuine organization to handle international differences.”
Compulsory military training, therefore, is to be, first of all, a club in foreign policy. Small wonder that some newspapers refer to Marshall’s program as a plea for a “Big Stick” policy. Marshall expresses his cynicism about any world conference and peace treaties, and certainly the London Conference should help remove any illusions about the “United” Nations and the “peace” of tomorrow. For the world today is only in a state of armed truce! And everywhere oppressed millions in India, the Indies, China, Africa and other countries are trying desperately to revolt against their tyrants and foreign rulers in Washington, London or Paris. General Patton’s phobia about a war with Russia is not unshared among the American brass hats.
To accept compulsory military training is to give the American brass hats the go-ahead signal in preparation for a Third World War, which they believe is inevitable! It means also to support the use of armed power to extend and retain the gains of American imperialism on a world scale, be it oil lines in the Near East, rubber plantations in the Indies, the markets of Europe or the raw materials of South America. It means to support the desperate efforts of American capitalism to prop up a dying capitalism in Europe and a host of reactionary regimes throughout the world, dedicated to the same purpose.
Turning to the domestic or military questions involved, there is little time wasted in Marshall’s report on the alleged blessings of compulsory military training. Marshall knows that too many citizen-soldiers know that talk of education in the Army is just plain bunk. One year’s compulsory technical school or university training for American youth would provide ten times the benefit of any Army “educational” course.
A higher standard of living for the American people would do more for the health of the youth than any army program. The reports of the selective service boards show that. And the reports of the Surgeon General’s office show what army life does to the health of an individual. No longer does the Army center its recruiting around the slogan, “The Army Builds Men.” Too many millions have been living on Army chow and under. Army conditions to believe that nonsense now.
 
The GI’s Anti-Militarism
Certainly the neatest intellectual performance of the year is Marshall’s rebuttal to the argument that compulsory military training might militarize the youth. “I submit the evidence of our present armies,” he replies. Yes, the Army certainly is anti-military, but not because the brass hats wanted it so. Rather, all the efforts of the brass hats to indoctrinate the citizen-soldiers into a love of the military failed completely.
But not through lack of effort: it was the bitter experience of the GIs in this ruthless organization in which the enlisted man was forever at the mercy of the officers that brought the anti-military feelings to the surface among millions of soldiers. The GI campaign against slow demobilization is an expression of this hatred of the military. The blasts at MacArthur and Patton by returning veterans speak volumes on this score. The popularity of Bill Mauldin’s cartoons is further evidence.
The “domestic” purpose of conscription is twofold: its adoption would be a deadly blow at democratic rights and ‘traditions of America because it would give dictatorial control to the brass hats over an important segment of the population; and it would furnish the means by which the big wartime military bureaucracy would entrench itself permanently and remain a powerful vested interest in American politics.
The deadly disease of militarism would become an inherent feature of American capitalist society. The instrument for retaining class power, for military machinations, for providing fertile soil for fascist plotters would be created.
The adoption of the Marshall program would be a signal to the world that the U.S. has taken the road to permanent military life and it would be a challenge for a world armament race. It would hang around the necks of the American people the curse and yoke of militarism. It would be a vote of approval of the ruthless imperialist policies pursued throughout the world.
It should be rejected in total.
 



Those analysts of the war who based their whole orientation on a
firm belief that sooner or later the war in Europe would turn into,a
combined, struggle against Russia, because it was a “workers’
state,” must be completely disoriented by recent events, or
else assume an ostrich-like attitude. In the February issue of the
English Socialist Appeal these views were present in glaring
fashion in an editorial. It stated three major points. (1) The Allies
couldn’t smash through the western front. (2) Russia was
achieving, the greatest military miracle in history because it had
the resources created by the October Revolution. (3) It had a morale
based on the October Revolution. If the editorial had only named the
"organizer of this world-shaking victory,” I am sure it
would have been reprinted in Pravda. But the analysis was
wrong on all three counts.
The collapse of the western front speaks for itself. As for point
(2), even Stalin has grudgingly admitted that lend-lease material
made the recent offensive possible (not to speak of Allied air power,
and the other two fighting fronts). As for point (3), neither the
huge toll of Russian prisoners nor the thousands who fought in German
uniform, especially in Southern France, nor the repressive discipline
in the Russian army argue for a morale similar to that which repulsed
Yudenich against greater odds in the defense of Petrograd during the Revolution.
Earlier some ultra-lefts argued for a concept characterized
best perhaps by the term, “short war theory.” War-weary
masses would soon end the world conflict by the overthrow of ruling
regimes. Last spring, this view went so far as to assure a quick end
in Europe based on a German revolt. This view I rejected for two
sound reasons. If the French workers, bound in a magnificent
resistance movement, were unable after freeing Paris, to seize and
keep power, how could one expect anything from the German people, who
are not only leaderless, like the French, but also pulverized,
atomized and brutalized by the regime to an extent almost
unbelievable? Besides, the politics of the Allies were calculated
precisely to prevent any such occurrence. Italy, and above all,
Greece, were lessons for the Germans on that score.
Currently, the war in Europe has not ended despite military
disaster for Germany (1) because of the repelling politics of the
Kremlin, (2) the terror regime of the Nazis (3) and because the
strategy of the “war of annihilation” refuses anything
but piecemeal surrender. Refusal to accept Von Runstedt’s offer
was in conformity with that strategy. The German people are going to
be taught the hard way what it means to take arms against the Allies.
In this connection, Eisenhower’s memo to Roosevelt, recently
made public, is not so much a prognosis as a plan. In my view, it is
unlikely that the Nazis will make things so simple as some hope,
namely that they shall band together in a final Götterdämmerung.
This is too simple a solution. The strategy of chaos, Hitler’s
last bet, can make more skillful plans, as witnessed by the decree
separating the party functionaries from the state administration.
In passing, one can’t help but laugh at the ignorance of
those who argued, or continue to argue (1) Only the Russian offensive
was responsible for the defeat (2) only the Allied offensive is
causing the disastrous defeat of Germany. Without the victory in the
battle of France no Russian offensive would have been possible. Air
power, too, played a considerable role. Conversely, the eastern front
gains made possible the Western break-through. Even today, the
Russian army is occupying the attention of the bulk of the Wehrmacht.
Chauvinists, Russian or any other brand, might argue in terms like
the editorial writer of the Socialist Appeal, but this method
has nothing in common with a serious military analysis, or an
internationalist who understands thing in their totality.
A third view, and one which was much closer to reality, was that
which prevailed fortunately in our movement. A stalemate was
considered probable, and a “long war” view was held. The
long war indeed has been with us, but an amendment is necessary in
the prognosis. Europe is confronted with a military victory, and a
decisive one at that. The weight of material and men has been
decisive. The Big Three have conquered Europe.
Before the battle of France it was legitimate to pose these
questions, for events hadn’t settled the issue: Would the
resistance movements be able to utilize the conflict to assume a
dominating role, or would their inspiring struggles be fully
subordinated to the Big Three? Temporarily, at least, the second
question became the reality. This is how the fundamental relationship
in Europe. It determines the course of political events in the next
period.
 
A Russian Revolution
The war in Europe ends with the decisive elimination of, one of
the major contenders for world empires. The grand prize of the war,
the fabulous colonies in the Orient, and decisive influence in China
stands before the Big Three. It is here where the sharpest
differences exist among the Big Three.
In Europe, once Germany is eliminated, a compromise on differences
is not too difficult. The Allies remain, united on one major
principle; defeat of any social revolutions. The reduction of Europe
into spheres of influence is accomplished.
 
War in the Pacific
In the Pacific, precisely the major differences, real and
impending among the Big Three, assure full and joint participation in
the campaign, to exterminate Japan, which will learn an unforgettable
lesson of the Genghis Khan variety.
England needs desperately to regain colonial conquests lost to
Japan, if it is to remain among the Big Three. The resources of
China, and its potential market have not escaped the eyes of the
merchants of Manchester. Britain will participate fully in the
Pacific. The problem is not whether she will participate, as some
falsely argue, but rather how to remove the imperial flag from a
recaptured Singapore, Hong Kong, the Indies, and elsewhere.
Stalin’s regime needs badly some substantial compensation
for the losses sustained in the European war. Manchuria, Korea, and
perhaps China are not exactly trifles. Besides, a Russia which needs
a chunk of Poland for protection must obviously safeguard its
approaches from Japan by seizing all adjacent territory. In China,
there exist already pliable allies, or puppets for Stalin’s Far
Eastern plans. The almost indecent haste with which the Stalinist
regime breaks with Japan indicates simply how much faster the
timetable in the Pacific War has moved than was expected.
In its “open door” policy, and the new version of
“trusteeship” of the colonial lands, the USA clashes with
the interests of both England and Russia. The rubber and oil
resources already belong to a large degree to the American
industrialists. Why not friendly governments? Or trusteeships, which
mark the decline of the imperial flag, and exclude the Kremlin?
The truly grandiose plans of the USA in the Pacific are the surest
sign that Washington understands thoroughly the politics involved
there, and what the basis for decisions at a “peace”
conference shall be. The connection between the vast armadas and
armies concentrated or “ear-marked” for the Pacific, and
the “peace” conference are not fully understood by many.
The large-scale landings planned on the China coast, the shifting of
the greatest military might in world’s history to the Pacific;
these are not moves only for, or necessary, to smash Japan. The
time-table in the Pacific is over one year ahead of schedule. And the
pace of Japan’s complete defeat accelerate.
The tremendous gains of the USA against Japan, in contrast to
earlier military prognosis, arise from two factors: In the first
place, Japanese military strength was greatly overestimated. In the
second place, the ability of American industry to produce a
super-military machine was vastly underestimated. This is reflected
in the present relationship between the two nations in two basic
arms: Airpower and seapower. In each it is a matter of a giant
against a. pygmy. In landpower, also, the Japanese are suffering
fantastic losses. If Iwo was a shock to the victorious nation,
imagine how the Japanese people felt? The Okinawa operation reveals
the glaring weakness of the entire Japanese military structure.
In view of this strategic picture, the grandiose plans hardly
make sense. They make less sense when one adds coming British and
Russian military intervention. Already, half the Japanese army is
immobilized by the threat of Russia. When Stalin moves at the
propitious moment, the days of Japan are numbered. But the scope of
American planning does make sense viewed against the conflicts and
clashes of interest in the East. China will not be a Poland if
American armies are in control of decisive areas. Or, more exactly, a
Lublin government is excluded. There is also the military occupation
of Formosa, the Indies, etc., etc. to be considered. Decisive
influence will rest with that power among the Big Three which has
reoccupied the territory involved in dispute. No doubt, just as
“guerilla warfare” in Europe can justify use of more
security troops, a similar phenomenon will exist in the Far East.
Just as the end of the war in Europe didn’t bring
demobilization, so the collapse of Japan and. its reduction to a
colony will not bring that peace which the people yearn for. Huge
naval and land forces will remain in the Pacific.
The kink in these grandiose plans rests not only in the colonial
masses, but, above all, in the people of USA and England. The views
of the serviceman shall also play a considerable role. Already the
non-fraternization law has failed. Everyone recognizes the “letdown”
problem after VE day, both at home and in the army. The extent and
scope of this reaction is the modifying force to big plans. The
process of disillusionment expands. But greater disappointments still
are ahead.
 



The Nazi army achieved a major tactical success with serious
strategic implications in the one-week-old counter-offensive on the
Western front.
Already the major objective of the German high command has been
attained: Complete disruption of Allied military plans for an
offensive from the West.
The complete surprise and brilliant gains won by the German army
stand as a sharp criticism of the Allied military leaders, who were
caught flat-footed by the offensive.
The basic reason for the surprise was not merely over-confidence
carelessness and poor leadership: above all, it flowed from a
fundamentally erroneous conception of German strength.
 
Why It Happened
The question has been asked, time and again, how did Von Runstedt
manage to mount such a large-scale offensive without detection by
Allied air reconnaissance, or by intelligence?
Significantly, there had been reports of German “reserves”
pouring into the front. These movements had been seen. But they were
totally misinterpreted. The Allied high command assumed that these
German troops marching to the front were replacements.
The Allied high command, in a word, overestimated seriously the
effects, on the German army of the deadly battle of attrition
(blood-letting) raging on the Western front.
Also, the Allied high command excluded the possibility of the
Wehrmacht making any serious counter-offensive, because it accepted
the popular view that Germany was on its last legs. (Max Werner was
the most vociferous exponent of this false idea.)
That is why the Wehrmacht did the “impossible.”
The Allied view was that the German armies were operating on a
shoestring, One serious large-scale battle would seal its fate.
Eisenhower’s winter offensive was begun for precisely that
reason. His prediction of an early conclusion to the European phase
of the war arose from this theory he held.
 
German Strategy Becomes Clearer
Front line dispatches, and the usual distortion by headline
writers deceived the American public into believing that the winter
offensive was succeeding. Actually, the only important gains were
made in strictly secondary areas, Eisenhower’s major drive in
the Aachen sector was limited. This was the background for the German
counter-offensive, from the Western front.
One other major factor, however, must be taken into
consideration, namely the situation on the Eastern front and its
relation to the events on the Western front.
The German high command, in a repetition of its strategy of the
First World War, although the strategy was in slightly different
form, had decided to force a decision on the West, while weakening
its strength in the East.
Von Runstedt judged that the Russian armies would not make a
major offensive of sufficient strength to derail his Western front.
schedule. The comparative inactivity of the Soviet army on the vital
Polish-East Prussian front, its preoccupation with political
maneuvers in the Balkans and Hungary and its lack of offensive punch,
which exhausted itself seriously in the summer drives these factors
determined Von Runstedt's strategy. It was simply an application of
German military views as ably presented by von Leeb in his major
work, Die Abwehr.
Thus far, the only Allied counter-measures have been the series of
counter-attacks, rear-guard actions and air blows against the German
advance when weather permits.
The hope has been expressed by Eisenhower that the present German
offensive is the last big gamble of the German high Command; that
German reserves are committed, so deeply that the present battle can
be turned into a decisive one in which Allied quantitative
superiority finally will emerge as victor.
 
Struggle Will Sharpen
This idea contains the same fundamental approach as the one on
which the Allied high command operated. It presupposes a lack “of
the independent will of the enemy.”
It is quite probable that von Runstedt, who doesn’t make
many mistakes, has defined his objectives exactly. Perhaps the major
part of the counter-offensive has already been finished. Von Runstedt
might easily be occupied in exploiting the remnants of his victory.
Already he has succeeded in disrupting for a few months any
Allied offensive against Germany. Once he consolidates his gains he
hopes to turn his attention to any belated Russian moves.
Even if the Allies finally drive him back to the Siegfried
line, the job will be a costly one, adding to the losses sustained in
the present defeat. In any case, the Wehrmacht is assured of more
time for other counter-measures to an all-out offensive.
 

  The most ambitious military program in the history of the world has been outlined in the 70,000 word biennial report of General George C. Marshall, Chief of Staff of the United States Army. Its primary objective is to assure American imperialism the mightiest military power known to man. Its main theme is a flagrant demand that America begin a world armament race of the kind that disastrously followed World War I. The report is a major effort on the part of the brass hats to terrify the American people, through nightmarish visions of future war, into accepting the principle of compulsory military training as a permanent peacetime feature of American life. General Marshall rewrites the history of the war and brazenly tries to whitewash a whole series of tragic errors and blunders of the brass hats. One of the purposes of this is to perpetuate the privileges, power and prestige of the military bureaucracy. It is of no minor consequence to millions of GI’s sweating out the demobilization process that Marshall lets the cat out of the bag on the real reasons why demobilization appears all messed up. Let us take up first the matter of demobilization, for it is the acute problem of the moment. It is customary these days to tell stories of how the Army messed up demobilization, how the situation at separation centers is scandalous, and then to dismiss the whole thing as another example of Army stupidity.  Behind Demobilization While everything said, especially by the victims, against the present system of demobilization is true, it is not the whole story. The basic cause of the slow and painful demobilization is something the congressmen and senators and the newspapers do not mention. But General Marshall inadvertently tells the reason: “Our present national policies require us to: maintain occupational forces in Europe and the Pacific; prepare for a possible contribution of forces to a world security organization; maintain national security while the world remains unstable and later on a more permanent or stable basis. “These policies require manpower. Yet at the same time it is the policy of the nation to completely demobilize the wartime army as rapidly as possible. Unless hundreds of thousands of men of the wartime forces are to remain in service at home and overseas, more permanent decisions must be made.” In plain words, Marshall says that unless the people want the soldiers to remain in the Army they had better support compulsory military training. Slow demobilization is the club used to attempt to blackjack the American people into committing the grave error of supporting the brass-hat proposal. The alleged bottleneck of insufficient separation centers is strictly a creation of the brass hats to achieve their aim. Besides, the brass hats have a vital personal interest in keeping the armed forces as large as possible as long as possible. It means retaining their high wartime rank. The personal ambitions of the brass hats ties in with the insatiable appetites of Wall Street capitalists, who want vast American military forces stationed throughout the world to be a police force protecting their foreign investments and their exploitation of the peoples of the world. When General Marshall speaks of “national policies” that is precisely what he is referring to. The tremendous pressure campaign by the GI’s to force immediate demobilization around the slogan “Bring the Boys Home Now!” is a direct blow at the imperialist policies of the present administration and the foundation of the brass-hat bureaucracy. The silence of the labor movement on this issue is a grave error which adds fuel to the fires of controversy between veterans and their union brothers.  Now It Can Be Told For two years the War Department sought to assure the people of America that the soldiers in this Army had the best equipment as well as the best weapons. The iron hand of military censorship was used to silence any possible criticism. Nevertheless, the situation became so scandalous that the criticisms reached the public press. Stars and Stripes published a series of letters from tank men arguing for a better tank than the Sherman, whose inferiority against German models was costing the lives of many brave soldiers. One very graphic illustration of the inferiority of American tanks was an Associated Press, story by Jack Bell. It told how Sherman tanks engaged the German Tiger tanks and how the American crew members wept in rage and frustration as their shells bounced off the better-armored Tiger tanks and how one shell from a Tiger tank pulverized its American opponent. Hanson W. Baldwin, New York Times military critic, took the issue up and blasted the ordnance department not only for its defense of the Sherman tank but for the entire system of ordnance work, which precluded fresh ideas and introduction of new and superior weapons. Now that the war is over, censorship is no longer all-powerful. Thousands of tankmen are coming home and telling their bitter day-to-day experiences. The truth is coming out. The bravery of these soldiers who fought, knowing they had inferior weapons, is a tribute to the courage of these citizen-soldiers. (Article 2 will appear next week)   



Among the more significant traits of the modern American labor movement has been the persistency of its unexpected developments that often confounded its critics, confused its friends, and, if the truth be known, dazzled and baffled its own leadership. The overall result of this turbulent history, since the great depression of the Thirties, has been the growth of a vast union movement quite unlike anything forecast or foreseen, or for that matter, anything previously seen in world labor.
In 1953, labor’s status in America is not what its leadership desired, expected, or was prepared for. Its enormous size and puny political role are an embarrassing paradox. It is plagued by a growing cancer of racketeering; it is disturbed by the impending recession, after living in the frenzy of an inflationary period. Its tremendous economic strength is reduced to half-size by the pernicious Taft-Hartley law. Nevertheless, labor’s leaders find solace and sources of optimism in the experiences of the past decade.
Surely no union leadership in the world was less prepared for events than the AFL of 1929, living in the fool’s dream of American prosperity unlimited, and concerning itself almost exclusively with the affairs of the “aristocracy of labor,” the skilled workers. When the split in the AFL took place in 1935, and the dynamic growth of the CIO startled the nation, even the AFL hierarchy was inclined to accept the general opinion of that day; namely, that the future of the labor movement rests on the ascendancy of the CIO. Its leadership moved with lightning speed compared to the slow motion of AFL leaders.
How surprising, then, and reassuring for the AFL leadership, meeting this fall in annual convention at St. Louis, to take notice of its membership of over 8,600,000 (with perhaps another million not reported since International unions of the AFL like to keep their per-capita tax payments down.) This is at least twice the figure of the junior CIO. It creates a relationship of forces on the unity question that assures the AFL of decisive voice, and eliminates for all time the notion that the CIO would dominate American labor.
Nor was the prevailing situation in 1953 any more startling than the twists and turns along the way. The very success of the early CIO gave organizational impetus to the AFL (many employers preferred it by far) and it quickly doubled its membership in the late Thirties. It benefited also from the splits in the CIO; Dubinsky’s return to the AFL; the walk-out of John L. Lewis and the coal miners union; and the purge of the Stalinist-dominated unions from the CIO.
Another unexpected and largely gratifying experience of the American labor movement came in World War II. The transformation of the New Deal into the War Deal caused understandable alarm in union circles, and the acceptance of the theory that war meant the strangulation of the unions, their complete domination by the state, and the reduction of labor leaders’ status to flunkey roles. This did occur, to one degree or another, but a new factor emerged which changed the overall picture in a positive sense. Unions hit an organizational bonanza, and unionism found itself larger, wealthier and more powerful in 1945 than in 1941!
Likewise, the gloomy forecasts of quick post-war depression turned out to be erroneous, and a restless rank and file was quite prepared for major strike struggles to achieve some of the war-postponed Brave New World. While the political vacuum in Europe was filled largely by a resurgent Stalinist movement, the American Stalinists lost ground and became less than a decisive problem. The triumph of labor in the 1945 elections in Britain aroused certain dreams and ambitions in American union leaders, but, by and large, the peak of social consciousness was reached in the General Motors strike with Walter Reuther’s bold program, including the “Open the Books” slogan.
From that point on, there has been a marked retrogression in the real power, influence and role of labor in America. Even before the Korean war served to domesticate the union leadership, the passage of the Taft-Hartley law signified the turning point: the unions were and remain basically on the defense. The capitulation to the Truman administration’s action in breaking the coal miners strike with an injunction and a $3,000,000 fine stimulated the reactionary forces in America. Servility brought only intensified attack.
Labor’s failure to defeat the late Senator Robert Taft of Ohio in 1950 spelled out the lowering of influence and prestige of the top union leaders. It was the harbinger of the 1952 national election, in which the union movement received the shock of losing behind a candidate considered ideal by most union officials. The first reaction of the union hierarchy to these adverse times and events, including the triumph of an avowed pro-business administration, was to seek quiet adjustment to the new realities. It furnished a reasonable answer to impatient ranks and critics: “Now is not the time for ...” Having made the theory of the lesser evil the modus operandi in all political affairs the labor leaders quickly adopted the strategy of working with the White House against the reactionary Republican wing of Congress.
 
The painful reality for labor is that the season for the kind of relations existing during the Roosevelt regime is long past. The Eisenhower regime is a war-conscious administration. Herein lies the crux of the dilemma of labor. Its support to foreign policy chains it in domestic politics. Its vigorous protests against armaments reduction – in which it merely echoes Democratic party spokesmen – makes ludicrous its claims for social gains.
Nor is this Gordian knot likely to be cut by any sharp move in the direction of independence in foreign policy or the creation of labor’s own party. Here, the past successes of the union movement imprison its leaders, no matter what important setbacks remain in mind. For the union movement has become far too deeply integrated as a social institution on the American scene to allow it the kind of freedom of action desired. Its stake in the status quo has become too large. In world terms, the American union movement has reached the once privileged position of British labor of the early Twenties. It is the world aristocracy of labor. Behind all complaints, demands and dissatisfaction stands the knowledge that compared to other countries, this is paradise – a TV and auto paradise, to be sure, but then that is the accepted standard. Of course, the impact of a recession is bound to change this mood among the ranks.
How about the leadership? Its new status in society makes it far more difficult to influence than the formative CIO, or the expanding AFL. Unionism is now an institution with 15,000,000 members. The total wealth of the union movement is between three quarters and one billion dollars. Its annual income averages over 700,000,000 dollars. Its staff and administrative machinery number over 150,000 persons. And this stratum lives with an income equal to that of the average Yale or Harvard graduate ten years out of school! The big army of ex-radicals who found a haven in the paying jobs of the union movement has achieved “socialism in their time.” Parenthetically, the impatience of union officials with critics is easy to grasp when this overwhelming fact of growth and wealth is recognized. Does not this successful officialdom deserve the paeans of praise it gives itself at conventions and conferences?
The middle-age spread has also been accompanied by a hardening of the arteries. Various critical sociological studies have probed somewhat into the bureaucratic trends. Questions posed by these critics have been answered negatively by events. The 15-year period of relative growth and prosperity for the union movement has left its mark in the ascendancy of business unionism. Democracy in the union movement does not consist in the intervention of the ranks in their own destiny. Less than 5 per cent of the ranks are active in any way in the life of the union. It consists rather in the freedom of various International union leaders or leaderships to maneuver, without domination from the parent organization. The CIO had an election for president after Phil Murray’s death not because it was considered democratic and desirable, but because it was necessary in the power clash between the Reuther and Macdonald factions. The autonomy of the AFL unions also rests on relationship of forces within the council.
Perhaps the best commentary on the state of democracy in the AFL is provided not by the longshoremen’s union – it was allowed its disgraceful misconduct for 15 years until exposed by outside opinion – but the recent defection of the Carpenters’ Union. Ordinarily, William Hutcheson acts as czar of that 800,000-man organization. He hand-picked his son for president. But when he arbitrarily withdrew the Carpenters Union from the AFL he was forced to reverse himself, not because his decision was undemocratic (his own executive board wasn’t informed until after the announcement of withdrawal) but because that maneuver threatened to upset the lesser empires that his associates had built within the AFL building trades. George Meany, and old building-trades men, knew this and acted accordingly, with expected results.
 
At the present time, the overwhelming bulk of American labor leaders are motivated by power-consciousness, important considerations of prestige, and a determined drive to achieve respectability as befitting their economic station in society. The cruder types like Dave Beck acknowledge this openly. The more sophisticated prefer to dress in statesman togs. To identify this kind of urge with class-consciousness is to make the wish the father of the thought. George Meany, rather than the early Walter Reuther, is the prototype of the American labor leader.
The philosophy of business unionism finds its expression also in the political activity of the union movement. It operates under the guise of “practical politics.” Its thought process includes the deceptive formula, “something is better than nothing.” It is another variant of the theory of the lesser evil. Loss of a “friend” in the White House and on Capitol Hill brings more fear of “isolation” – which is how labor leaders view independence. Thus, the labor leaders cling ever more desperately to whatever is left in Congress of “friends of labor,” and the importance of these allies is doubly exaggerated precisely because they are impotent as a moving political force. In national politics it gives rise to a fervent hope that Adlai Stevenson will be available in 1956. The parvenu bureaucracy is far more interested in finding the right coat-tail to hang to, than asserting its own will.
The futility of this approach has been amply demonstrated in previous Don Quixote excursions by the CIO in politics. The latest illustration concerns the ignoble state of affairs in Michigan, home of the UAW-CIO and of CIO President Walter P. Reuther. Just a few years ago, the CIO entered the defunct Democratic party in Michigan, gave it flesh, blood and bones, and even produced a winner for governor, G. Mennen Williams. Now, such being the times, the UAW spends its energies parading as responsible Democrats, wooing recalcitrant Democrats, and, if it must be admitted, urging Governor Williams to treat it as having something better than second class citizenship. The crowning touch in this spectacle – and this reverts back to the point of integration into society – is added by the conduct of many CIO officials who found a comfortable home in the Democratic party. Increasingly, the attraction and prestige of being on the “Governor’s team,” is far more satisfying than mere union accolades.
(And the increasingly routine character of most union jobs, which take on an errand boy status intensify this byplay.)
The Michigan example has been duplicated, with slight variations, a thousand arid one times on the national scene. It forces the general observation that the intertwining of the union bureaucracy with the Democratic party machinery, and the privileged status of the union bureaucracy operate to keep the participation of labor in politics within the framework of the Democratic party in the next foreseeable period. This general outlook, which admittedly excludes any labor party development in America in any old expected form, is reinforced by making an examination of the increasing gap between the union officialdom and the ranks.
 
The changing character of the union movement is not to be found only in the emergence of a full-blown bureaucracy, with a privileged status in America, and the great wealth of the organizations, but also in the composition of its ranks. Large, new untapped layers of unorganized workers joined the CIO and the AFL during the recent period of boom and expansion of American industry. They did not share the vital mass upsurge kind of unionization that was literally a social crusade in the late 30’s. They are organized but by no means unionized, as Walter Reuther has pointedly remarked on more than one recent occasion.
The socially-conscious depression generation is not a distinct, basic current in the union movement anywhere. Its leaders are in the bureaucracy, or in private business. After 15 years of steady employment it owns homes, and has reached the point in life where pensions become increasingly attractive. The vast bulk of the union ranks are either young workers, war veterans who absorbed far too much cynicism about unionism during military life, and the recruits from the hinterlands, bringing all their prejudices and notions along with them.
The potential danger of a backward organized mass movement was foreseen, of course, by many union leaders, and was to be overcome by genuine educational programs. “We’ve got to unionize the organized,” Reuther insists. But how timid and pathetic any gestures in this direction have been was told recently by Kermit Eby, former CIO educational director, in his articles in the Antioch Review. In the frequent choice of either educating new and fresh leaders, who might turn out to be rivals, or simply adding to the staff to furnish “leadership” and incidentally retain control, the CIO leaders inevitably took the prudent course. The hamstringing of the once ambitious UAW educational program by confining it to the teaching of techniques rather than ideas and a philosophy of labor speaks for the power of bureaucratic pressures. The rude attack by Sol Barkin of the Textile Workers Union against a sound critique of union education by Eby, which was printed in Labor and Nation, indicates how sensitive and blind the union leaders are to this vital issue.
Thus, there is a mood of no-confidence between large layers of the ranks and the top leaders. Ironically, the very backwardness of the newly organized workers, and the disappearance of the old cadres, creates a relationship in terms of ideas and programs that contradicts the old saw about the bureaucrats being behind the masses. Since many of the leaders were unionized before they became bureaucratized, and they have developed a sense of social outlook through many experiences, they act far in advance of the thinking of the bulk of the delegates at many union conventions. While this has not been always true, it does apply to a period like this where secondary leaders, closer to the ranks, succumb to all pressures, good or bad, from the people in the shops.
It hardly seems reasonable or likely that the distrust, and in some cases fear, that the top leaders have of the ranks will embolden the union movement to take a major step of breaking from within its confines and setting up its own political party. An additional reason remains to be added.
This period of American labor history is unlike any previous epoch in that, for the first time in its broad life, the union movement lacks any kind of radical compulsion. There is no serious political force challenging the status quo and the leadership personified by the status quo. The AFL historically was challenged by everything from the Socialist Labor Party to the Wobblies and the post-World War I radical movement. And, although it has been erased from all official union history in recent decades, neither the CIO nor the AFL would have achieved anything like their status without the eager participation of thousands of young radicals, Socialist, Communist, Trotskyist, or others, in the hectic and hard days. Ideas, criticisms, programs, new leaders; the whole gamut of internal union life and organizational growth owes itself to this milieu, most of which today is in the upper strata of the union movement, living with faint recollections of the good old days, and kidding itself with the pleasant thought that once a depression hits, they’ll revert back to their youth.
Labor lacks an internal motive force, as a result of this condition. It lacks a conscious stratum concerned with creating and expanding a labor ideology, a philosophy of unionism, with some of the grand nobility of ideals of socialism. The union pay-check has become the reward and work-drive rather than the profound conviction and satisfaction of being part of man’s great struggle for emancipation. This is the basic crisis of labor leadership in America today. The growing intolerance of union leaders to any form of dissidence, the pressure against any sign of independence, and the comfortable middle-class mode of existence enjoyed by the new bureaucracy suggest that, as far as they are concerned, the crisis simply doesn’t exist, or, in any event, the problem is not an important one.
The fate of the once powerful German social-democracy before the impact of events and the challenge of fascism should serve, however, as a warning. Neither unionism as usual, nor politics as usual, serve the cause of labor in time of great crisis. And surely, the converts to capitalism among the labor leaders do not have quite the confidence they boldly expressed a few years ago. 1929 was a fool’s paradise also.
 




No gathering in the history of the American labor movement attracted anywhere near the attention given the 11th annual convention of the Congress of Industrial Organizations in Cleveland, Ohio, during the first week of November 1949. More than 250 reporters, journalists, radio commentators and other writers covered this convention whose five days of sessions were broadcast throughout the world on the Voice of America programs and whose deliberations provided sensational daily headlines in the American press. Nor was this worldwide attention amiss. For it was a turning point in the history of the American labor movement, because for the first time since its birth and growth in 1937 the CIO as a decisive sector of the American labor movement was considering openly and unambiguously the problem of Stalinism both within the CIO and as a political force on the world scale.
 
A Convention of the Bureaucracy
Who confronted this problem at this convention? Primarily the CIO bureaucracy with nearly 613 delegates, most of whom were leaders of international unions which constitute the CIO. It was, so to speak, a porkchoppers’ convention. There were no rank and filers present. This then was the new labor aristocracy which had arisen in the past 10 years, and which had arrived at a breaking point in its past and not so complex relations with the Stalinist machine. Many of the CIO leaders had worked closely in alliance with the Stalinists over a period of years. Others were almost indistinguishable in their conduct from the Stalinists, leaders like Michael Quill of the Transport Workers Union and Joseph Curran of the National Maritime Union. This convention represented an irremediable break between the national trade-union bureaucracy rooted in the American labor movement and the Stalinist totalitarians desperately seeking to retain some organizational and political influence in the industrial union movement of America. The clash between these two forces was and is an uncompromising struggle for domination and control of the key industrial union movement of America, which has a membership of around five million and whose loyalties are largely with the CIO bureaucracy. It is unlikely that the Stalinist-controlled unions have more than 600,000 actual members.
The personification and symbol of the CIO bureaucracy was, of course, Philip Murray, president of the CIO, a man who rose to national prominence as a loyal lieutenant of John L. Lewis, founder of the CIO, and whose 35-odd-year career in the labor movement is marked by an unbroken record of bureaucratic domination, methods and outlook. (It seems like only yesterday, although it was three years ago, that Murray was still working closely with the Stalinists against progressive anti-Stalinist movements from below such as were symbolized by Walter Reuther of the United Automobile Workers Union.)
The outstanding Stalinist apologist at the CIO convention was Harry Bridges, president of the International Longshoremen’s Union, who earned nationwide prominence as a labor leader during the 1934 San Francisco general strike, and who has since then destroyed his militant past record by becoming acknowledged as the most capable, shrewd and undeviating Stalinist party liner in the CIO.
 
The Reasons for the Conflict
What were the sources of the open rupture or, more exactly, the amputation of the Stalinist bureaucrats from the CIO bureaucracy? Fundamentally there are two causes. First, within the framework of trade-union organization and policies the Stalinists have built up an unparalleled and terrible record of misleadership which included such items as (1) strike breaking, as, for example, in the Montgomery Ward strike during World War II, (2) totalitarian rule or ruin tactics against all opposition and critics, (3) advocacy of totally reactionary not to speak of antiunion policies, as, for example, agitation for piecework and incentive pay during the last war, and (4) total irresponsibility toward the union movement.
Such a criminal record would have long ago boomeranged and caused the Stalinists to be ousted from all strategic positions in the CIO except for the fact, which must not be forgotten, that during this period they were in an alliance with the CIO top leadership, including Philip Murray. Whatever strength they retain in such unions as the United Electrical Workers,
Mine, Mill & Smelter Workers and nine other smaller if somewhat vociferous unions, is due to the fact that the CIO rank and file was unable to defeat this unholy alliance. They were unable to break through the protective covering that the CIO bureaucracy gave the Stalinists. Only in the UAW-CIO with its magnificent and rich tradition of rank-and-file democracy were the active union cadres gathered around Walter Reuther able to smash Stalinism. An important factor today in the belligerency of the rest of the CIO bureaucracy toward the Stalinists is the triumph of the Reuther tendency in the UAW and the enlistment of this million-man-union against Stalinism and all it stands for in the labor movement.
The other basic source for the bureaucratic expulsion of the Stalinist-dominated unions and the Stalinist leaders from the top CIO officialdom is the pressure of the cold war between American and Russian imperialisms. The shift in the world situation with the adoption of a new line of the Comintern signified for the American Stalinists the advocacy of Henry Wallace for president on a pseudo-third party ticket and irreconcilable opposition to the Marshall Plan and all other manifestations of American foreign policy. The clash on these questions like the Marshall Plan, the Atlantic Pact, attitude toward the Polish question and other foreign policy problems between the Stalinists and the CIO bureaucrats at this convention mirrored the imperialist antagonisms of the two great world powers.
No one expected the CIO bureaucracy, which had worked with and often adopted the techniques of the Stalinist totalitarians, to carry out a militant, progressive and genuinely democratic struggle against Stalinism. The Murray leadership of the CIO resorted rather to the time-honored bureaucratic methods of all conservative labor officialdoms. Having failed to build up decisive majorities within the Stalinist-controlled unions by a progressive program, the CIO leadership seeks to regain control by summarily expelling the so-called “left-wing” unions like the UE and replacing them with newly chartered CIO unions. In the case of the UE, the convention action of expulsion was facilitated by the failure of the UE leaders Fitzgerald, Matles and Emspak even to show up at the convention to defend their viewpoint. The CIO executive board was empowered furthermore by the convention to take all necessary action, including expulsion of any affiliated union which showed consistent “political unreliability,” that is, leanings toward Stalinist ideology and program, or with Stalinists in its leadership.
 
The Weakness of the Stalinist Position
Against this purge, which was conducted in an extremely hostile and bitter atmosphere, neither Harry Bridges nor any other Stalinist spokesman made or could have made effective or important counterattacks for the very simple reason that there was no bureaucratic action, no political abuse and no fiery and emotional statement hurled at them at this convention by the CIO bureaucrats which had not been outdone 100 times over by the Stalinists in their 11-year history in the CIO.
When Bridges cried for “democracy” or international union autonomy, the CIO leaders replied by exposing his own nefarious record of bureaucratic machinations. It was not accidental that the hatchet man for the CIO leaders was none other than Joseph Curran, who for 10 years was Bridges’ closest ally in the CIO and who was trained in the Stalinist school of falsification, slander and bureaucratic bludgeoning.
Often at this convention, in terms of the democratic rights involved – and these are important considerations – the debate took the form of the kettle calling the pot black. But this should not conceal the important and decisive distinction between the CIO bureaucracy with all its limitations, and the Stalinist totalitarians. For the CIO bureaucrats do in their own miserable and faint-hearted fashion represent and seek to represent the interests of the American industrial workers organized into the CIO. Their actions do reflect a pressure of the rank and file, and their timid, half-hearted struggles for pensions, social security and other bread-and-butter demands do indicate at least an elementary self-interest. As for the Stalinists, their record in the CIO, as exposed quite ably and devastatingly by such speakers as Walter Reuther, is one of functioning solely and exclusively as colonial agents of a totalitarian power, namely, Stalinist Russia.
Fundamentally the very sources of the split between the CIO bureaucracy and the Stalinists are the reason why the overwhelming bulk of industrial union workers will support the CIO bureaucracy no matter how poorly conducted, how bureaucratic or how pitifully inadequate their struggle against Stalinism may turn out to be. This is doubly true today precisely because there is lacking a third genuine alternative to the contending factions. There is no significant socialist cadre or socialist-dominated union with power to intervene effectively and on a consistently progressive basis in the struggle against Stalinism. Those unions like the powerful UAW-CIO which are the genuine left wing of the CIO lack a sufficiently courageous and progressive leadership to serve as that kind of rallying center for all liberal and labor forces who want to conduct the best and most successful kind of struggle against Stalinism.
 
The Issue of Foreign Policy
While the differences on a trade-union level between the CIO bureaucracy and the Stalinists are clear, and one can support without a moment’s hesitation the CIO’s fight to retain all the unions from the Stalinists, the problem is far more complex and the issues greatly blurred when it comes to the basic and broad political questions involved. No thinking worker will be fooled by the repetition of the hard-and-fast line of the Cominform which the Stalinists like Bridges, Ben Gold of the Fur Workers or others presented on foreign policy questions.
The CIO leaders with few exceptions had no program apart from that of the American State Department to counterpose to the Stalinist views. To be sure, one prominent CIO spokesman, George Baldanzi, said that he and the CIO were against American imperialism as well as Russian imperialism, and he pointed out that no Stalinist spokesman dared to utter as much as one word in criticism of Russian imperialism. But the fact is, as a shrewd Stalinist pointed out, the CIO resolution on foreign policy did not contain the slightest criticism of American foreign policy; on the contrary, it rejected vigorously all charges and claims of war-mongering on the part of Washington. The most telling part of this aspect of the convention was not, however, the inability of the CIO leaders to reply to the demagogy of the Stalinists, but rather the alarming as well as truly unprecedented fact that the real reply to the Stalinists was made by none other than three of the outstanding figures responsible for implementing America’s imperialist policies.
The CIO convention heard Joint Chiefs of Staff Chairman Omar Bradley and Secretary of State Dean Acheson, as well as Secretary of Labor Maurice Tobin virtually dictate the policies of the CIO on the all-important foreign policy problems. Their appearance at this convention could only signify one thing to Stalin and the Politburo in Moscow. This was the CIO’s reply to the cold war – 100 per cent support in the struggle between Washington and Moscow. Unquestionably this aspect of the CIO convention could only have a very negative effect on the European labor movement and above all its conscious politically thinking elements who are searching fervently for signs in the American labor movement that it might be a real as well as potential third force counterposing itself both to Russian imperialism and Wall Street’s atomic war perspectives.
 
Stagnation in Political Action
The primary if not total preoccupation of the CIO convention with the problem of Stalinism inevitably aggravated another weakness of the CIO movement. Labor lives today in an epoch in which it is threatened with strangulation by Taft-Hartleyism. It feels keenly the defeat of the coal miners’ union. It is disturbed by the small and very inadequate gains it wins only after great strike struggles like the steel walkout. It is puzzled by the defeat of important strikes like the Singer and Bell Aircraft walkouts. It is haunted by the fear of growing unemployment. Yet the attention paid to these burning and living problems was at best perfunctory. As a matter of fact, the behind-the-scenes deal which caused the Bethlehem Steel Corporation’s settlement with the Steel Workers Union was timed to coincide with the opening of the convention and to facilitate an evasion of these acute problems on the domestic front. The political discussion was desultory and very routine. After one or two brief speeches, the convention simply reaffirmed the policy of supporting liberal candidates of both capitalist parties and explicitly rejected any third party political realignment such as the Reuther leadership in the UAW has been timidly suggesting off and on during the past three years. We do not doubt that a continuation of the present capitalist “prosperity” will give the CIO leaders a sufficient breathing spell to stumble along for a while without suffering too painful defeats and making themselves easy targets of Stalinist criticisms. But in the event of a depression, the lack of vision and lack of perspective in the CIO political program will turn out to be more than an Achilles heel. It will constitute a house built upon sand.
Not until the last day of the convention did the delegates bother to discuss even the vast difficulties which arise in the organizational struggle for the domination of the eleven unions which are being or have been expelled from the CIO. At this point Philip Murray felt it necessary to warn the delegates of some of the tribulations that lie ahead, for every unionist knows it is one thing to pass a set of resolutions at a cut-and-dried convention where one has an overwhelming majority, but it is an altogether different and more difficult task to carry them out in practice. Already the disputes, the court fights, the injunctions and the free-for-alls between the Stalinist machine and the loyal CIO members in the UE suggest that the inadequacy of the CIO program will make doubly difficult the organizational success of the CIO against the Stalinists. (When one reads that the IEU-CIO organizational conference in Philadelphia on the weekend of November 27 had among its featured speakers Secretary of Navy Francis P. Matthews, Secretary of Air W. Stewart Symington and Secretary of Labor Maurice J. Tobin, it becomes increasingly clear that the CIO leaders are more concerned with the political consequences in terms of the Moscow-Washington war than with the day-to-day union problems to which this convention should have been devoted if the Stalinists are to be smashed in the electrical industry field.)
In one of his early speeches Philip Murray bewailed the fact that “decent American labor is caught between dictatorships and totalitarianism, like Wall Street and the Communist Party.” Although Murray denounced both of them, his strongest language was reserved for the “diabolical, subversive Communists.” The whole tone of the convention was that of a crusade or “holy war” against Communism.
At best the CIO convention gave a very, very inadequate answer to this problem of the dictatorship of Wall Street or the totalitarianism of the Communist Party. This is true in spite of the fact that the CIO, assisted by the American state, that is, the Truman administration, the courts, the FBI, etc., may and probably will defeat and destroy the Stalinist influence in the CIO. But if the cost continues to be the brutal violation of all democratic rights, the complete hardening of the arteries of the CIO bureaucracy and its transformation into a bureaucratic machine dominated by conservative leaders like Philip Murray, then certainly the rank-and-file unionists throughout the country are entirely justified in the grave concern with which they view the coming period of the CIO.
 
Need of a Balance Sheet
Only by drawing up carefully a balance sheet can the militants in the American labor movement begin to prepare themselves for the difficult tasks ahead. What are the costs, of the struggle against Stalinism as it is being conducted today in this social milieu? On the trade-union level the war between the Stalinists and the CIO bureaucracy has as its first victim the Southern drive, the so-called Operation Dixie of the CIO. The postwar organizational campaign of the CIO to carry out a very necessary task of organizing the open-shop South had already bogged down. The CIO has neither the energies, talents nor the ability to carry this on and to struggle with the Stalinists simultaneously.
There are many indications that the AFL will gain because of the fight. The disillusionment with the CIO (“It’s too damned factional”) and the bewilderment of many of the rank and file by the complex issues are something that the AFL will not lose an opportunity to take advantage of. Of course, the appeal of both sides to provisions of the Taft-Hartley Law to help them win the struggle, and the fact that the rule rather than the exception is to take the intra-union struggle into a capitalist court, signify a growing dependence on the part of the union movement to the bourgeois state. It is a step away from labor’s organizational as well as political independence. This development, coincident with the greater and greater dependence of the CIO leadership on the national administration through techniques like fact-finding boards, signifies a very disturbing dissipation of organizational power and independence. In terms of trade-union structure and democratic rights, the newly adopted constitution of the CIO tends to transform this trade-union movement which should be a free association of individuals united on primarily economic questions, into a sort of hybrid political party in which membership depends as much on political views as it does on an economic united front.
Such important democratic manifestations as the power of the city, county and state councils of the CIO to express their own views on problems of the day are a thing of the past. These organizations have been transformed into mere agencies for carrying out the “line” of the national organization. The genuine autonomy of international unions no longer exists, since all unions must carry out national CIO policy, something which not even the hidebound AFL bureaucracy demands, at least at present, of its affiliated unions. Concomitant with these bureaucratic changes comes the hardening of the bureaucratic arteries, for the whole national CIO becomes a powerful, cohesive bureaucracy patterned largely after the machine that Philip Murray has used to solidify his complete control of the Steel Workers Union.
 
The Danger of Witch-Hunting
The virulence of the speeches against the Stalinists and the “anything goes” policies have a special significance in this epoch in which reactionary hysteria and witch-hunting are dominant features of American political life. Outside of the restraints of the national convention where the entire CIO is, so to speak, parading before the public eye, the struggle against Stalinists in the shops and in the local unions will take on a much more brutal and vigorous form. The protestations of the CIO bureaucrats that they are democrats and believe in “honest differences of opinion” are a little too much when one views the outrageous actions of Curran of the NMU against a clearly nonStalinist opposition in his union. We do not think that this will be an isolated incident, but rather reflects the hardening of the CIO structure on a nationwide basis throughout all the unions. In passing, we might point out that both the UAW and the United Rubber Workers will feel more and more the pressure of the CIO to transform themselves into images of the bureaucratized Steel Workers Union.
In the struggle against Stalinism the CIO bureaucracy at this convention gave every indication that it was tied – lock, stock and barrel – to the war machine. There was not one ounce of the traditional anti-militarist or anti-war sentiment at this convention.
As against all these negative features, there was and remains only one positive accomplishment. The Stalinists no longer have the cover of the CIO to carry out their nefarious activities as agents of a totalitarian power. Last and by no means least, no report or analysis of this convention would be valid unless it stated truthfully that the most glaring and fatal feature at this turbulent gathering was the lack of a single socialist voice to counterpose the real workers’ struggle for freedom, peace and security against the impending days of doom and the Third World War.
The reconstitution, or more exactly, the building up of a socialist cadre in the American labor movement whose sole and exclusive right and claim to existence is its devotion to the cause of emancipation of the American working class, is a task that today has ten times more acute importance than it had yesteryear. Without it the American labor movement will retreat and suffer more and more defeats as it gets caught in the squeeze between Wall Street and Moscow. With it there is a world to win.
 



DETROIT – At the one-day conference called by the top leadership of the UAW-CIO to outline in detail its 1949 economic goals and the tactics to achieve them, the most significant fact that appeared was the absence of any important opposition to these plans.
Only one speaker, John Anderson, president of a small GM local, challenged the “one-at-a-time strategy” and he was effectively answered from the floor by a Chicago delegate, Karl Shier, who indicated that in the context of the auto industry situation the plan to concentrate on Ford was the best. As usual, references to supplementing economic action with political action by the building of a Labor Party, which the speaker made, were greeted with much applause, even by some of the top UAW leaders.
The Stalinists had one important spokesmen there, Francis Danowski, of Plymouth Local 51, but he didn’t present the “Rank and File” viewpoint, as the Stalinists now dub themselves.
 
Mazey Presents Tactics
The main speech at the conference was delivered by Reuther, who gave it the usual militant tone he specializes in when dealing with UAW gatherings. Among other things, he blasted the steel industry and its refusal to expand steel production, the fear propaganda being spread by big business in widely advertising current layoffs as a means of curbing all fourth round labor demands. He informed the delegates, that the March 14 executive board meeting would go “all out in building an organization in every community in the country,” in referring to political action.
Emil Mazey gave the report on the tactics, and why Ford was picked. Certainly the Ford Motor Company is most vulnerable to attack on this question and it appears that the UAW leadership is preparing for an all-out fight against Ford. Two interesting sidelights came out in this discussion. The crisis at Ford’s will come the day the UAW convention ends in July! So that the whole convention can and probably will be used as a rallying point to get the whole UAW steamed up to support any Ford strike, and also to get nation-wide publicity for the UAW pension fight.
Secondly, Philip Murray, president of the CIO and of the steel workers, has a contract which has a deadline one month after the Ford deadline! Murray is perfectly content to let the UAW-CIO take on the fight. And the Reuther leadership is very willing to take the lead, for despite all the fine speeches of Reuther about CIO policy, and the great labor leader Philip Murray, the facts are too obvious for anyone to ignore.
If the UAW waited for CIO leadership, it would have to wait a long, long time. As a matter of fact, in basic industry like steel, the weight of the labor movement is stronger and the steel workers could provoke a first-class crisis by striking, but that is exactly what Murray is seeking to avoid. He prefers to ride on the UAW bandwagon, if a victory comes at Ford.
A third report at the conference Was by John Livingston, vice-president in charge of the FE drive. The best that can be said for it is that the newspaper reports that the UAW organizers shouted red-baiting remarks at the East Moline workers were cooked up by a local newspaperman. (A story on the FE situation appears elsewhere in this issue. – Ed.) The fact remains that Livingston is the wrong man for this job which should combine a real organizing talent with an appreciation on how to win the FE rank and file over.
Livingston is too much of the red- baiter at heart to give that kind of leadership. And the top leadership of the UAW-CIO is responsible for letting him handle this campaign, which thus far has obtained, for the most part, unfavorable publicity.
*
DETROIT – The primary economic objective of the UAW-CIO in negotiations with the auto industry in 1949 is the establishment of an adequate pension plan with a minimum payment of $100 a month for auto workers reaching sixty years of age and having lengthy seniority in the shops.
The first target chosen for cracking the auto industry on this program is the Ford Motor Company, because it is the most “vulnerable” from any point of view, and perhaps a “pattern” can be set if victory comes at Ford.
Since the UAW is tied down by contracts at General Motors and Chrysler, which in theory exclude bargaining on pensions in 1949, the Reuther leadership hopes to break through this obstacle by winning a victory at Ford which the other corporations must follow.
Of course, the ranks show every sign of supporting this economic objective. The Ford locals are approving it, and even in locals where Stalinist influence is strong, the CP program of making a straight 30 cent hourly wage increase the main objective, does not carry by itself. The ranks vote for both a 30 cent increase and a pension plan program.
 
Ranks Declare
For no one is against the pension plan. How can they be? The question is what kind of pension plan, and who pays for it? Dick Leonard, former UAW-CIO vice president, and ex-Ford director, tried to sell an inadequate pension plan and it helped retire him from active leadership in the union two years ago.
Unlike the confusion that exists on the wage-price spiral issue, the ranks are clear on the idea and value of an adequate pension plan. Since nearly 75,000 autoworkers would be immediately eligible under the UAW proposal, even a “recession” and subsequent unemployment would not deter the fight for a pension plan. It would be another argument for it. “Retire the old men on a pension, and give the young jobs.”
Not the least of the reasons the Reuther leadership decided for the pension plan was precisely the fact that the economic outlook is beginning to look cloudy. And the pension proposal gives the union most “elbow room,” irrespective of which way the economic picture looks six months from now.
 
Major Showdown
Although early indications were that Reuther leadership thought it might be able to win a pension plan by negotiations, the attitude of the Ford motor company has become increasingly hard, and it looks like a major showdown will be necessary.
Thomas Thompson, president of Ford Local 600, nearly threw a monkey wrench into the Reuther plans when he wrote a public letter to Reuther urging him to try to call a nationwide industry-labor conference to negotiate a pension plan on a nationwide scale. Because GM and Chrysler could easily use the alibi that “under our contract we are not under any obligation to take up this issue,” and thus avoid a meeting, and then Ford could say, “we will, when they will,” the Thompson proposal simply played into Ford’s hands.
As far as this writer is concerned, Reuther’s scheme of concentrating on Ford, who is on record for a pension plan, and who is vulnerable in the competitive field with GM and Chrysler, is sound strategy. “One at a time” strategy makes sense. Critics who oppose it fail to understand either the difference between a basic industry like coal mining, and the competitive aspects of the auto industry, and the whole history of labor-capital relations in the auto industry.
If Ford is cracked wide open on this question, then either Chrysler or GM can be taken on next. GM will be the toughest nut to crack because the corporation has the union tied down to a contract until 1950, and it may prove exceedingly difficult for the UAW to find a way around it, if at all.
 
GM Contract
In this connection, it is almost amusing, but more accurately, tragic, to see how the Stalinists and other factional opponents of the Reuther regime seek to exploit the “escalator” clause in the GM contract, under which the GM workers probably will get a two cent cut from the recent increases they obtained under this very same contract.
How easy it is to forget that these same opponents sabotaged the GM strike votes, and the fact that the whole American labor movement was in disastrous retreat until the UAW broke the no-wage increase front of big business by the Chrysler strike and the threat of another at GM.
But outside of the howling in the Stalinist press, it is unlikely that the demagogy on this issue will convince many rank and filers. It is interesting to note that in the local union elections, many former “left-wingers” are running on slates which either ignore the anti-Reuther issue, or candidly admit that as far as “international union” politics are concerned they are not against Reuther.
 



DETROIT – In its symptomatic importance, the tone, atmosphere and political trends revealed at the recent UAW-CIO national educational conference have much weight, for this union remains a most sensitive barometer of advanced working class thinking and political development in America.
Although this conference lacked the formal authority of a union gathering, such as a national convention, nevertheless its surprising character – and its response to political questions was surprising to everyone from Walter Reuther down to the ACTU people there – is bound to have an important effect on the coming July convention of the UAW-CIO.
For all politically-wise circles in Detroit are talking about this conference: the ranks who returned by and large praise it highly, and the politicians estimate it with an eye to the national convention. The conference didn’t fit into the pigeonhole it had been assigned, after the Truman victory last November. Quite the contrary.
Readers of Labor Action know the way the pro-labor and/or third party sentiment, shown in the delegates’ responses to Robert Lynd’s speech and to George Baldanzi’s references to “democratic socialism,” marked the high point of the conference. What does this signify?
In our judgment, the tempo of developments toward a labor-third party movement is faster than first seemed the case after the Truman victory, although still slower than appeared the case in event of a Truman defeat (as seen in everyone’s pre-November prognosis).
A brief review of political events in the UAW and the CIO after Truman’s victory can serve to bring us up to date and provide us with a sound vantage point to view the period ahead.
Right after November 3, Gus Scholle, Michigan CIO president, kissed all third party movements goodbye, and prepared for a long and comfortable stay in the Democratic Party. Certainly this was popular among the ranks, and perhaps no one was more surprised than Scholle when he was privately called down by Reuther et al. for making himself the spokesman for the UAW-CIO. After all, even before November 3, the Reuther political sharpshooters knew that Governor G. Mennen Williams was not going to be their boy, and it would be a mistake to put all their eggs in one basket.
As a matter of fact, this fear of taking responsibility for the course of the Democratic Party both in Michigan and Washington is one of the important reasons why even the national CIO now speaks of “keeping PAC independent,” and “building our own political machine.”
For both the UAW-CIO and national CIO leaders have fewer illusions, in our opinion, about the possibility of realizing a “Fair Deal” than the ranks, many of whom are taking Truman at his word. In 1945–46–47–48, the CIO top leaders have had their fingers burned many times by Harry Truman, and while they publicly make no mention of the past, it rancors in their memory.
Only this week, President Truman announced his “improvements to the Wagner Act.” What are they? The cooling off period and fact-finding boards, which President Murray of the CIO denounced on December 4, 1945, over a nationwide radio broadcast, after Truman recommended them to Congress.
Fact-finding boards? A rather sensitive point in Reuther circles. Remember when President Truman’s fact-finding board first cut down the GM strike demands from 30 cents to 19½ cents, and then the Truman administration let GM ignore them, and President Truman permitted a steel price increase and broke the principle for which the UAW was fighting?
 
Build Political Fences
Another important aspect of the idea of “building our own political machine” comes from the realization that the union movement could have done more. More exactly, an impetus toward participation and voice in politics was inevitable after November, for the class power shown then built up a badly needed self-confidence.
A concrete illustration, of some importance. Perhaps the unhappiest man over his personal misfortunes last November, next to Thomas Dewey, was George Edwards, the UAW’s ambitious front on the political scene. If he had only taken a chance, like Humphrey of Minnesota, he would now be in the Senate! But, like a good Reuther man, he played it safe and now he is sorry.
Nevertheless, the time has come, and Edwards is going to run for mayor of Detroit next fall! Labor’s political power and future look good enough for the cautious Edwards to take a chance! In preparation for that event, the UAW is building its political fences in wards and precincts and getting ready for a campaign that will make the Frankensteen-for-mayor fight look like the kind of amateur affair it really was.
In our judgment, the conduct and results of the coming Detroit mayoralty campaign will be important in influencing the whole labor-third party development. A victory for Edwards will be interpreted as a triumph for the UAW-CIO, and his defeat as a blow at the union. No matter what kind of a campaign Edwards puts on – and it is highly likely that he’ll try to play down the class angle – the capitalist press will insist on making it a class issue.
Of course, the kind of campaign the UAW puts on will depend on the actions of the active unionists. Their sentiment at present was reflected at the Milwaukee conference.
Although Edwards would like personally to run as a Democrat, for he is a member of that party, the present incumbent, Van Antwerp, is much more likely to get the backing of the Democratic Party machine because he was elected by it, while the UAW backed ex-Mayor Edward Jefferies, a Republican.
Two years ago, at the Wayne County CIO convention, various proposals were made to have George Edwards, run for mayor on a labor ticket. Or at least as an independent, backed by labor (the Detroit elections are “non-partisan”). This idea was sneered on as “impractical,” “dividing the liberal vote,” and other stale arguments were used.
Yes, the political consciousness of the UAW has increased considerably since that convention. It’s political self-confidence is higher. George Edwards is going to take a chance.
 
Gosser’s Success
Within a few weeks, the tactic of “capturing” the Democratic Party will be put to a severe test. The State convention will show whether or not the UAW succeeded. We doubt it very much. Furthermore, we think that the recent “order” from top UAW leaders to their followers “not to take a job with the Democratic machine,” is as much a recognition of the failure of this tactic as it is a step in the direction of independent political action.
It’s almost ironical, and certainly amusing, that down in Toledo, Dick Gosser’s bailiwick, the UAW has succeeded in building a political machine and in establishing a working coalition with the AFL which not only elected Thomas Burke, Local 12, UAW-CIOn, to Congress, but also created a permanent labor political force. This force knows it can win by its own power, while in Detroit, where all the “smart” Reutherites figure out the policy, the UAW is just beginning along these lines!
There is one thing Dick Gosser seems to understand better than the many Reutherites. To have power you’ve got to build a machine. He built one in the UAW-CIO and he built one in politics. The purpose of said machines is not to put friends in office but to exercize power in labor’s interest and to control your own destinies.
 
Tempo Gains Speed
We doubt if the Toledo UAW-CIO spent one-fourth as much time, money or energy behind Thomas Burke as did Detroit’s East Side locals in getting Louis Rabaut back in Congress.
And for what? So that Rabaut will fight for labor’s ideas, program and policies? No one ever made that claim for him. “He votes right on many issues,” was what the UAW said. But why should the UAW spend thousands of dollars to put a man into Congress to do a job that any child could do, namely, vote once in a while?
Especially since the UAW won the election by its hard work, its terrific organization, its expenditure of funds. In retrospect this seems incredible, but the UAW man who did the job of directing the election campaign on Detroit’s East Side has twice the qualifications and ability – in addition to being a working man! – as Rabaut. The UAW man, Ed Carey, goes to Lansing as a state representative, where he becomes “assistant floor leader of the Democratic caucus.” While in Washington, where the UAW needs its own spokesman in Congress, Walter Reuther’s lobbyists have to run around putting pressure on the men the UAW elected three months ago?
These ideas are percolating more and more in the UAW-CIO. For ten years the UAW militants spent most of their time building political power within the union because they understood control of the machinery was necessary if you “wanted to do things your way.” The virtual collapse of the anti-Reuther faction signifies the end of that kind of epoch. Now the period has arrived where the central job is building political power in government “to get things done our way.” From November’s taste of power to building labor’s political machine, to transferring the experiences and lessons of the faction fights of the old days into political struggles of tomorrow – that is the UAW’s problem today. Far more union activists understand that than most people thought. The Milwaukee conference indicates ... [sentence incomplete]
The tempo toward a labor-third party movement, retarded seriously in November, from a short-term point of view, already gains speed.
 



DETROIT, May 22 – “They had Reuther over a barrel, but now he’s got them over the barrel.”
This pithy comment of a Ford worker, after hearing Walter Reuther’s speech outlining the new program and strategy of the UAW in the Ford strike, summarizes accurately the great change in the character of the strike now that the Reuther leadership has made a drastic turn in policy.
For what Reuther did was to combine the strike against the speedup with the struggle for the UAW 1949 economic objectives, including the pension plan. He has “shot the works” and the UAW is now engaged in the first great strike struggle of the labor movement in 1949.
How did the rank and file react to this militant program? In spite of a heavy rain and windstorm, between 15,000 to 20,000 Ford strikers came to a mass meeting of Ford Locals 600 and 900 to hear the Reuther speech. They came in a belligerent, bitter mood. They left inspired and determined to win.
How did the Ford officials react? John Bugas, ex-FBI agent and boss of Ford negotiators, not only lost his smooth and urbane manner in negotiations, he also lost his temper.
For Bugas recognized that he is no longer up against reasonable “labor statesmen,” controlling a subdued rank and file. Ford is up against the kind of UAW ranks and leadership that built this union through great strike struggles.
 
Recovering Their Stride
Credit for the turn in UAW policy belongs primarily to Reuther, Emil Mazey and Leonard Woodcock, the regional director from Muskegon, who is high in Reuther circles as one of the few progressive leaders. The rest of the Reuther leadership kept floundering around until the new line was worked out and presented.
What was required was a coldblooded analysis of the trap into which the Ford Motor Company had led the UAW unless it transformed the strike over the immediate issue – speedup – into an all-out struggle for everything, including a. new contract and the pensions. It required a recognition of the futile character of the previous strategy in the Ford strike. It required some willingness to take the kind of chance Reuther took in the 1945–46 General Motors strike. Any retreat would be disastrous, any status-quo policy would be fatal to future plans – so the choice was full speed ahead.
Besides most of the other Reuther leaders, the anti-Reuther forces were stumbling around in the narrow conservative approach, typically “trade union,” which precluded them from having any program capable of meeting the necessities of the situation. Rather interesting that the “socialists” and ex-socialists of the Reuther leadership had the imagination and courage to work out a new strategy.
When Mazey opened the mass meeting, and he began to give the kind of talk on speedup which many Briggs Workers had heard him make before, it was clear to the ranks that something different was going to happen. Mazey’s declaration that the union would not compromise with speedup at Ford drew the first real response from the ranks.
The reporters, who had taken the meeting as another “dull union meeting to cover on a nasty night,” began to sit up and take notice.
The atmosphere was set for Reuther’s report, the main speech of the evening.
Reuther ridiculed the latest Ford demand that all workers except those in the B building go back to work. He urged the rank and file to vote against the strikebreaking proposal. The meeting began to warm up.
Then came the analysis of the speedup question. Reuther was not “investigating the facts, since they were in dispute.” He excoriated the company’s speedup policies, and told the ranks: “We’ll never go back to those days.” This was what the ranks were waiting for. The confusion of the past began to disappear. The workers were listening intently.
What about the men who had been discharged – the 21 secondary leaders? “We all go back or nobody goes back,” Reuther told the cheering strikers. By the way, this is not exactly the easiest thing in the world to accomplish. But Reuther’s pledge was categoric.
Next came a sharp attack on Henry Ford II and on the whole Ford philosophy, and a call for some “sharing of the wealth which your toil and sweat created.”
And then the announcement that the UAW was demanding immediate discussions and negotiations on the pensions and on the contract! (The reporters scurried from their seats to the phone booths. This was NEWS.)
“You can talk all you want about making a democratic world, but if you can’t make democracy work in this, the richest country in the world, it will fail everywhere.”
“We will fight together, work together, stand together and win together.”
The response to the summons for a real fight was what you could expect. The UAW was on the march again.
The Reuther leadership is now in a position to exploit the “elbow room” it has created in the situation by making all-out demands now. If the company, threatened with a demand for pensions and a new contract now, retreats and says, “Let’s settle the speedup issue,” and the UAW wins on the speedup issue, then the union has won the first battle at Ford. This would not yet win the war, but it will have demonstrated that the union can fight and win. The vast majority of Ford Workers would be confident they could win the rest of the demands, and Ford would be negotiating the pensions and contracts under the knowledge and certainty that the UAW was prepared at any time to hit the bricks again.
Besides, in this strike, as in every struggle, many inactive and inexperienced union cardholders become active union men and strike veterans. For thousands of Ford Workers this is their first big strike. The veterans of the 1941 strike have obtained a real refresher course. Ford Locals 600 and 900 become better and more spirited local unions because they go through this struggle.
If the company doesn’t retreat, the spirit and determination of the UAW members increases because the strike issues – the 1949 demands – directly concern each of them as much as the speedup issue itself has done. Reuther proposes negotiations on the speedup, the discharges, the contract and the pension plan now. “If they won’t talk on all of them beginning Monday, we won’t talk on any of them.”
What a pity a photographer didn’t get a picture of Bugas and Reuther on Friday morning when Reuther, accompanied by Mazey and others, presented the new demands of the UAW to Ford officials. All pretenses of amiability and “reasonableness” were missing. The hostile, angry atmosphere was more in keeping with the differences of basic approach and outlook between the UAW and this giant corporation than previous pleasantries.
Reuther rubbed Bugas even more when he announced that the UAW would file an unfair labor practice charge against the Ford Company if it didn’t negotiate on pensions. No longer was the company arrogantly issuing ultimatums to the union. Now the union was taking the offensive.
 
Anti-Reutherites Missed Bus
The whole change in the strike situation emphasizes over and over again how powerful the UAW is when it sticks to the kind of progressive policies and militant actions which built and strengthened it. This needs to be underscored precisely because the UAW was getting “soft and flabby.”
Another important lesson already shown in this strike is the role and bankruptcy of the anti-Reuther forces. We have mentioned the blundering of the conservative Reuther followers. Now is the time to speak of the anti-Reuther factions.
Just before the mass meeting, the pro-Stalinist leaders in Ford Local 600 came out with their program for victory. What was it? (1) Win the speedup fight at B building. (2) Make the general council the strike committee. (3) More strike bulletins. (4) Call a rally at Cadillac Square in support of the strike.
These self-styled “left-wingers and progressives” missed the bus completely, They were lost in routine unionism at precisely the time when a bold strategy for an all-out struggle was demanded. They looked like the conservatives they really are compared to the Reuther tendency!
In fact the Stalinists look so ridiculously conservative with that kind of program that we venture a prediction they’ll try to make another comeback by mouthing some ultra-radical phrases. It’s about time for them to dig up the “down with a one- at-a-time strategy” nonsense, and call for ‘“an industry-wide strike” for pensions.
The future of Stalinism is being decided on the Ford picket lines just as much as it is in Judge Medina’s courtroom. The verdict of the test of events in the Ford strike is infinitely more important to the labor movement than any decision by a capitalist court. This is a question to which we will return time and again as the Ford situation develops.
 



DETROIT, May 9 – The United Auto Workers, CIO, face a major crisis in policy and 1949 strike strategy as a result of the strike at the giant River Rouge plant of the Ford Motor Co. Here is a strike which the Reuther leadership tried to avoid, but which the Ford Motor Company was determined to provoke, and it succeeded.
The full story of this strike, directly involving over 100,000 Ford workers, involves important revelations of the strength and weakness of the Reuther leadership, of the UAW ranks, and the stormy course that the 1949 economic struggles of the union are destined to run.
The background of the current strike is vital to an understanding of the crisis in which the UAW now finds itself – a crisis so evident in Detroit that only a sharp turn in events will change the present situation.
As most readers of Labor Action know, the Reuther strategy for 1949, as reported in various stories, was to concentrate on Ford for a $100-a-month pension plan, to be obtained by strike action in July if such tactics were necessary. Then Reuther planned to squeeze Chrysler and perhaps General Motors into a similar settlement.
This strategy was to unfold in a “favorable political climate,” since the Truman-Democratic administration was pro-labor and the Taft-Hartley Law would be repealed, and a new period of New Dealism, called “the Fair Deal,” would begin. At least this was the “blueprint” of Reuther’s thinking.
Within the UAW, the Reuther leadership was overwhelmingly supported and these ideas accepted. Nothing was going to upset the apple-cart.
To be sure, there were disturbing signs of speedup attempts in many plants, but that was an old story in the UAW, and it could be handled as usual. Some pressure here, a concession there, some slowdowns here, a walkout there: all this was secondary.
The major concentration was Ford in July.
What this overall campaign failed to take into account was (1) the illusory character of the “pro-labor” Washington administration, as everyone recognizes except the UAW leadership, which finds itself increasingly embarrassed by the failure of Truman to come across.
 
Ford’s Strategy
(2) The fact that the Ford Motor Company labor-relations boss, ex-FBI Agent John Bugas was not a simple-minded dope who would sit idly by while Reuther gained important concessions for the UAW ranks and won fresh glories as the up-and-coming labor leader in America. On the contrary, Bugas worked out a strategy to get the union on the run and keep it there. And it must be stated, candidly, that at the present time the Bugas plan has succeeded so far.
What the Ford Motor Company did was to join the drive which all major companies are carrying on to speed up the workers – not just in the usual fashion, which comes with every model change-over, but rather to press real hard against the workers.
At Ford the effect of the speedup would be twofold. If it succeeded. Ford would exploit enough extra labor from each man on the assembly line to more than make up for anything Ford had to give in the way of a pension plan in July. It would be a scheme to take the pension plan out of the sweat and toil of the Ford workers.
If the workers resisted and slowed down or refused to do extra work, Ford would provoke a series of wildcat strikes to get the union to dissipate all its strength this spring, so that when summer came the union would be too exhausted to strike for pensions.
 
Speeding Issue Hot
This last point was understood by the Reuther leadership, and the Ford Company knew that the Reuther leadership understood this. Thus the company knew what reaction the Reuther leadership would have to demand from the Ford workers for a strike against speedup.
Ford therefore refused to settle the debated speedup question in the B building, which is the final assembly line at this huge plant. After 40 meetings on the issue, the company still refused even to compromise. The issue itself is understood by every auto worker. In any normal production schedule of cars, allowance is made for breakdowns, bad stock, shutting down of the lines, etc. If the line is down for a half hour, for whatever reason, the men get a “break.” The Ford Company, however, wants the men to make up production. Of course it goes through the pretense of adding enough men to the line to give help, but that is never really done. So the men are speeded up.
The speedup is so universal in auto now that over 200,000 workers have been involved in disputes of various sorts with the companies on this issue. This is important to remember in view of what happened at Ford.
The heat from the ranks in the shop became so hot that Tommy Thompson, president of Ford Local 600, who only in October, 1948, denounced “demagogues and Communists” for exploiting the “speedup issue” (we can settle everything peacefully through negotiations, he declared) and his caucus which had recently won an overwhelming victory in local union elections, listened to the ranks and decided that they would support a strike against speedup.
At Ford Lincoln plant the speedup issue also became so hot that the officials demanded authorization for a strike from the international executive board.
Faced with this “hot potato,” the Reuther leadership sought to put pressure on the Ford Company by authorizing the Lincoln plant strike, but withholding authorization from Ford Local 600, representing 65,000 workers.
Of course this incensed the ranks in Ford Local 600, above all the secondary leaders in B building where the speedup issue was burning everyone up.
On top of this, the Reuther leadership issued a truly incredible (not to say stupid) statement on the Ford 600 situation. “Since there was a dispute in facts” between the local union and management on the speedup question, the international union selected a committee headed by Emil Mazey to go into the plant and investigate.
 
Leaders Fell for It
This was a blunder. Of course its real purpose was to give the top leadership a chance to stall off a strike and to see if things could be settled by negotiations – a worthy objective, of course, but it failed to take into account the reaction of the secondary Ford union leaders and the ranks. For these people were not let in on the “higher strategy.” This was something just for the “elite.”
Now everyone knew there was a speedup issue at the B building. Thus the statement of the Reuther leadership was a direct insult to the shop committeemen and ranks. They blew up. When Mazey and the other international officials came into the plant they were given a rather rough reception. And the whole shop committee in this plant resigned in protest over the action of the international!
More than that, the ranks joined the secondary leaders and walked out of the plant!
What especially burned up these workers was the fact that they knew that Ford would be smart enough not to have any speedup the day the union officials were investigating. And naturally things were okay on the line until Mazey and others left. Then the same old speedup policy was renewed.
Thus Ford successfully played the international union leadership against the workers in the plants, and the Reuther leadership fell for it. In justice to Mazey it must be said that, he was maneuvered into heading the committee, and both the Reuther devotees and the Thompson faction are concentrating all blame and abuse on him. (Reuther did not go into the plant that day.)
The irony of Mazey’s position is emphasized by the fact that at Briggs, which he strongly dominates, the local union carries on a good campaign – including walkouts – against speedup, and it defeats the company time and again.
What is also very significant about the events in B building is that this is the Reuther stronghold in Local 600. The shop committeemen and the unit president who resigned are all pro-Reuther. Later they were talked into repudiating their action. This was a revolt of the Reuther secondary ranks against the confused, uncertain and hesitant policies of their own top leaders.
This fact has been a major disappointment to the many capitalist journalists who rushed to Detroit to uncover a “Communist” plot at Ford. It has been and remains a source of embarrassment with the Reuther leadership. It has left a deep impression on many UAW activists.
 
Local Decided on Strike
Of course, Tommy Thompson (who broke his recent deal with Reuther – Reuther supported Thompson for reelection over the protests of many Reutherites) wasn’t going to get himself into such an uncomfortable position. Therefore, when the company
arrogantly refused to negotiate seriously with the union on the B building issue (in fact, it fired 14 committeemen but this was kept from the rank and file because everyone knew that nothing could prevent an immediate strike if that was known in the shop), Thompson and his strong majority on the general council at Local 600 set a strike deadline – last Wednesday.
How stupidly the Reuther leadership was handling this crisis, which was far deeper and more acute than is recognized, was shown by the fact that at the time of the council meeting debate on the strike motion, Joe McCusker, regional director and a Reuther man, told them: “This will be a wildcat. It won’t be authorized.” A very unpopular position both in the Thompson forces and among the Reuther supporters at Ford!
As a matter of fact, the Thompson forces knew that the international would have to go along with them on strike action if a decent settlement wasn’t obtained quickly, for the ranks were demanding results, and anybody who stood in the way was bound to lose rank-and-file support.
Walter Reuther knew this as well as the next man, and the strike was authorized, with a postponement of one day while Reuther tried last-minute negotiations. Bugas was as arrogant as ever, the negotiations failed and the strike began!
A day later, Bugas threw more fuel on the fire by making the public announcement of the discharge of the 14 men in B building. Other workers had been disciplined in other departments for staging brief demonstrations of sympathy.
Attempts to mediate were turned down by the company. They blasted the union, ridiculed the charge of speedup and over the weekend poured more salt on the wounds.
 
Legitimate Issue
In the face of these blows against the union, the Reuther leadership reeled like a man given a one-two punch. All they could see for a few days was that “Walter’s strategy is ruined, and Thompson’s to blame.” (No doubt Thompson should have kept the ranks in a firm iron grip, according to the conservative Reutherites, and if the ranks threw him out later, that would be all right too, for wasn’t he anti-Reuther?)
Much confusion has been sown among Ford workers in other plants by the fact that, for some time, the Reutherites have been stressing the point that anything which upsets the strategy is terrible and a defeat for the union.
The leaders of both factions have made irresponsible statements about the others and have permitted “leaks” to the press; and this has given the company a chance to describe the situation as “due purely to union politics.” This is nonsense, for in reality what is involved is a legitimate debate over policy in which contending leaders seek to prove that they are better qualified to lead the workers. As long as the UAW has a democratic structure and maintains its tradition that the various leaders seek to win rank-and-file support by fighting for their demands, so long will the union make progress, and “freshen up” its leadership – and this crisis shows it needs to do this today.
The Detroit Free Press, as well as the Ford Motor Company, bewails the fact that the UAW is not controlled bureaucratically like the Steel Workers Union and wishes Reuther would place an administrator over Ford 600 just as Murray does among the steel workers.
 
UAW’s Dilemma
What is the real dilemma of the UAW? What should it do? Every effort to find what answer the Reuther leadership has, or what anyone else proposes, has ended up in failure. One listens to speeches at rallies, hears Reuther spokesmen at union meetings, asks questions of anybody and everybody, and it is clear that for a week Reuther had no “line” – no real policy, just anger at the company for not being as reasonable as it should be, according to Reuther’s thinking, and bitter feeling against the Thompson faction for the problem that it presents to the Reuther forces.
Today George Edwards, acting Detroit mayor, sought to get Ford and Reuther together. Behind the scenes many efforts are being made. (It’s really terrible how much like his grandfather Henry Ford II has become. Somewhat disappointing to many people, don’t you know! The epoch of enlightened capitalism is having a retarded development in auto, we fear, in spite of Reuther’s theories and hopes to the contrary.)
More easily than many of his followers, Reuther is beginning to recover his balance, and is making moves calculated to retrieve a messy situation. Surely, if the UAW wins this speedup strike quickly, the Ford strike is a good dress rehearsal for July 16 contract deadline. If it gets any satisfactory compromise the leadership can probably play up the action as a real dress rehearsal, and UAW people will be told that Reuther had it planned that way all the time.
But the adamant attitude of the corporation suggests that maybe there is no choice but “shooting the works.” Negotiations on the pension plan can begin next Sunday, although Ford says he won’t meet with the UAW while it is on strike now.
Certainly, the confusion and hesitation in other Ford locals would end if the UAW went all-out for the program overwhelmingly adopted at the recent Ford national conference. It means making the big strike now.
Reuther’s dilemma consists in the fact that in order to do this he has to take on the whole “world,” as he did in 1945–46 in the GM strike. Already all the “friends of labor” in Washington are screaming that the UAW is upsetting the whole possibility of “repealing the Taft-Hartley Law.” This fake argument, we think, is taken seriously by Reuther. (If only labor would be reasonable – submit to a speedup – take a no-strike pledge – abandon wage demands, the Taft-Hartley Law would be repealed. Of course! Why have a Taft-Hartley Law on the books if the labor movement turns’ itself into a company union, and its leaders into watchdogs over the rank and file?)
 
Test Is Beginning
If Reuther doesn’t strike out boldly he loses both national and UAW prestige. After all, he has promised to deliver the goods. The UAW does have a united leadership on top. They can’t blame “the Communists.” They are out in the cold, even in Ford Local 600, where everyone hates them. (The men on the picket line resent the popular notion that the CP has been running their local for a long time.)
If the speedup strike alone remains the issue and is prolonged, hardly anyone thinks the UAW can call another strike in July. If the union exhausts itself in a purely defensive struggle, it signifies giving up the economic objectives of 1949. Small wonder that Reuther is on the spot!
Even some kind of face-saving compromise now, rather than a real victory, simply postpones the showdown and the crisis confronting the UAW. For if the Ford Motor Company is this “tough” now, and the whole Washington administration and all the “friends of labor” are exerting conservative pressure on Reuther now, think how much greater that pressure will be in July! (And meanwhile, it is a safe guess that the Taft-Hartley Law will remain on the books until after the 1949 wage negotiations, including steel, coal and auto, are over.)
It is going to take a bold, dramatic and courageous all-out fight on the part of the UAW to win anything in 1949. The real test of the Reuther leadership has just begun. The future course of the Ford strike will decide its future.
Once again the UAW concentrates in itself the problems and struggles of the whole labor movement.
 






The following article was received by Labor Action before the Ford strike. We regret it has been crowded out until this issue. With the situation it discusses now highlighted by the Ford strike, it is important for understanding the background of current developments. – Ed.



*
Although the United Auto Workers, as well as the steel workers’ and the coal miners’ unions, has ambitious plans for pensions and welfare gains in 1949 contract negotiations, the fact of the matter is that these unions are finding themselves in a series of defensive actions to retain what they thought they had permanently won.
While the unions are proceeding on a “demands as usual” basis – and it is very significant and important that the ranks of the industrial-union movement expect gains this year, and are prepared to fight for them – the unions are running into the realities of life caused by the tremendous war-preparations program and the Marshall Plan.
The dilemma of John L. Lewis is apparent. A coal industry which is having a sharp reduction in production this year is hardly likely to accede to Lewis’ grandiose plans, nor are his friends in the Republican Party in a position to help him “gang up” with the operators to raise coal prices again to a level which assures high profits and bigger pay checks with less hours of work. President Philip Murray of the Steel Workers has already announced a “me-too” attitude: “I want what John L. gets” – hardly a bold course of action for a man claiming to be the leader of the industrial-union movement in America. Suppose Lewis doesn’t get anything? What does Murray propose? To fight? Hardly! He has already preferred to tail behind the UAW or the coal miners.
The trouble with the UAW leadership is that it. has not sufficiently taken into account either the situation in the other unions or what the Wall Street rulers of the auto industry are planning and doing. Nor does it take into account what the cost of the Marshall Plan, the Atlantic Pact and other U.S. commitments are. The “guns and butter” theory is having a harder time as each day goes by.
In terms of the national political situation, the UAW leaders have said they believe the political climate is more favorable for the union’s winning demands this year. The mood of the workers is better, far better than it was in 1948 – what is the climate in Washington? For concessions from Truman and Congress? To ask the question is to answer it.
 
UAW’s Dilemma
Everybody in the UAW expected, for example, that with the introduction of new models the corporations would try to speed up the assembly lines. They have always done it and they always will until labor controls the industry.
But the fight against speedup has far transcended the “normal” struggle. It is not just that over 200,000 auto workers in the past three months have been engaged or involved in “wildcats” or have called strikes against speedup. It is the fact that the corporations aggressively continue this drive, and keep the union fighting a series of defensive struggles – not to win something new, but to keep what they have already won!
The Ford Motor Company provoked the wildcats and forced the union to take a strike vote on this issue – with a huge turnout, incidentally, and with a mood of determination on the part of the Ford workers. Ford obviously wants to keep pressing the union so that when the contract negotiations come up the union will be exhausted or at least weakened.
Yet the union must fight the speedup or suffer a real defeat. So the UAW leaders face a real dilemma and a difficult problem. In most plants quick walkouts have slowed the corporation’s drive toward speedup. But at Bendix, for example, the union has an important strike on its hands to get rehired 47 men fired for allegedly participating in a slowdown and wildcat.
The corporations’ strategy may make defensive struggles more necessary, but they have another effect which backfires on the auto barons. They also keep the men “on edge,” keep the union on its mettle, and keep the ranks in an explosive state of irritation. In fact, it looks as if the companies are determined to make the auto workers become more and more radical, and to help keep the UAW the militant and aggressive union that it has been.
In this general context, it becomes more difficult for the Reuther leadership to “deliver the goods,” as the membership expects. For the first time since it took power in November 1947 the Reuther leadership is on the spot. And the next six months are going to be very decisive for the UAW and its leaders.
 



DETROIT, May 31 – The 24-day Ford strike has ended with inconclusive results, in terms of the immediate issue that caused it – the speedup – and with a moral blow to the prestige of the UAW and the Reuther leadership.
The Ford Motor Company insisted on two main points: (1) arbitration of the speedup issue, and (2) no talks on pensions or the contract until after the men went back to work.
Walter Reuther told the strikers a week ago Thursday that the union wouldn’t compromise with speedup, and (2) it would insist on pension negotiations during the strike.
The major retreat was made by Reuther. His statement proclaiming the settlement a union victory was disingenuous: “This is the first try. It was a hard clean fight. We won the first round. Now let’s go into the second round – contracts.” If the union wins the speedup dispute in arbitration, there will be some basis for Reuther’s claim. But the UAW suffered badly with regard to forcing the company into pension negotiations. Reuther backtracked in his demands; he accepted arbitration – he insisted on it as a means of ending the strike; and negotiations on the contract and on pensions now begin without any real spirit of victory or confidence among the Ford workers!
 
What “Victory”?
Whether Reuther outsmarted himself or was outsmarted by John Bugas (Ford’s labor boss) in the final days of the strike is secondary to the fact that the Ford Company conceded very little, and did succeed in making the Union reverse its proclaimed public policies and program.
When Reuther proposed arbitration he suggested it on the basis of a “loaded” question on speedup: Does a man have to make up work which was lost through no fault of his own? Secondly, Reuther had a deal fixed up in Washington where an arbitrator would be appointed who would probably rule in favor of the union. In that event the union would have won the first round, even though it accepted arbitration.
But Bugas and the Ford Company didn’t fall for that one. Instead they stalled, and finally forced the union, which was now committed to arbitration, to accept a formula that compromises the whole fight against speedup.
The Reuther leadership had to spend some time convincing the Thompson forces in Ford Local 600 to accept the settlement. Even then, Tommy Thompson (head of the local) told the settlement meeting that he was still against arbitration.
Although Reuther told the meeting “I think we will win because our claim is based on a specific contract clause,” his own lack of confidence in the results of arbitration were indicated when he said: “If we lose, then we still are in negotiations and we will have a good chance to change the line in the contract.”
If the union can lose the speedup issue in arbitration, as Reuther admits, where does the victory in the present settlement exist, except in the publicity release of the Reuther leadership?
How the Ford workers felt about the settlement was indicated by the attendance at the settlement meeting. Less than 4,000 showed up to vote on the proposal. Why show up? If the union accepted arbitration it was over, so why waste a day going to a meeting? For three days the newspapers had been saying that the strike was as good as settled. Reuther’s retreat was obvious to the most backward workers, let alone to the union activists.
 
Heat Under Reuther
The Stalinists put out a leaflet denouncing the settlement as a “betrayal,” but didn’t try to make a major floor fight: (It was one of those situations where confusion and bitterness makes any discussion futile; and the workers are still hostile to the CP, especially the Thompson forces who, while going along with the settlement, are doing a real job on Reuther as the man chiefly responsible for it.)
Reuther, in his speech, denounced the CP and ridiculed its flipflops, but failed to mention by so much as one word his own painfully obvious flipflops in this strike.
In the auto industry as a whole the fact that the UAW didn’t win this fight encourages the other companies to continue their drive on speeding up the workers. The struggle for a better contract and pensions in Ford is made much more difficult.
An indication of the present situation is revealed in the quietly ignored fact that at Chrysler, where the union can reopen negotiations on wages on June 15, Norman Mathews, UAW Chrysler director, hasn’t even issued a call for a national delegate conference of Chrysler workers to discuss the problem and work out a program.
The period of disillusionment with the Reuther leadership has begun among the Reuther followers. There is little indication that the CP will gain. The other anti-Reuther faction seems to be completely dormant or still punch-drunk from all the defeats it took in recent local union elections.
But in the Reuther ranks, dissatisfaction has grown and has become more vocal. It remains to be seen if it becomes strong enough to force some changes in the Reuther leadership at the next convention.
 



DETROIT, May 16 – The Ford Motor Company continued its drive against the UAW-CIO during the past week in a way that has aroused the kind of bitter feeling and hostility among the strikers such as will make any compromise settlement more difficult.
Meanwhile the UAW leadership was beginning to lose hope that it could isolate the strike issue into merely a B building dispute. The negotiations between company officials and UAW leaders headed by Emil Mazey began to sound acrimonious this week.
Rubbing salt into the wounds, the Ford Company announced that another seven Ford Local 600 officials were fired last Friday.
Since the company did this ostensibly under the “company security” clause which was put into the 1946 contract by the bloc between Richard T. Leonard and the Stalinists (and it remained thereafter), there is not much agitation on this point by the Stalinists. In other respects they are trying desperately to exploit the inability of the Reuther leadership either to win a quick compromise victory on the speedup issue or go all-out for the pension plan now.
When a few pickets under the urging of the Stalinists began to picket negotiations, Walter Reuther denounced them, and the newspapers had a field day against the “Communists.” Among UAW ranks this was taken as a matter of course. Everyone knows the CP is trying hard to make a comeback.
 
Reuther’s Prestige Down
But when Reuther posted in a very friendly picture with John Bugas, the ex-FBI agent who is boss of the Ford negotiations, the reaction against Reuther was noticeable in many shops. There is little question but that his personal prestige has taken a slump downward during the past week and a half. The friendly pose was taken when. Reuther congratulated Bugas on the birth of a child. It was certainly a poorly timed publicity stunt.
For some reason that is inexplicable – unless one delves into the field of psychology – the top Reuther leadership felt late, last week that settlement would be reached. This judgment was wrong.
Ford officials are making a real fight on this question. They insist on the right to speed up the line, through running production schedules as they see fit.
Ford officials likewise are hammering home the fake argument that union politics is the ONLY cause of this strike. Newspaper stories arc also appearing about “Reuther losing control of the ranks,” etc., all calculated to influence Reuther in a conservative direction.
Union publicity and arguments have not been very hard-hitting or effective against the company drive. The top UAW officials do not yet see the political picture clearly, nor are they ready by any means to make the kind of fight required to get the UAW on the offensive and the company on the run.
Today, under the contract, the union could officially begin negotiations on the pension plan and other benefits. But the Ford Motor Company said it wouldn’t negotiate on these points while a strike was on.
Ordinarily when a company pulls that old gag, the union officials bluntly tell them they had better negotiate or else the plants will remain shut down until hell freezes over. The silence of the UAW top officials in the face of this company arrogance is ominous.
In negotiations with Briggs or other companies, Emil Mazey at such points starts getting tough, and before the thing is over the union has won considerable concessions. It remains to be seen if he has either the determination or the power to do so in the Ford strike situation. Reuther is in Washington at a CIO board meeting.
 
Muffing the Ball
The entrance of the U.S. federal mediation service does not change things a bit. In critical situations like this involving major disputants like Ford and the UAW, the mediators are pretty small potatoes – and the Ford Company has already reminded them that they are.
The great opportunity that the UAW leaders are missing to crack down on Ford and get results for the rank and file can be indicated by merely pointing to some of the things the Reuther leadership has failed to do.
Henry Ford II is a nobody insofar as the actual operations of the company are concerned. He never did a thing to contribute to the manufacture of automobiles. He is a pure and unadulterated parasite whose sole claim to the vast Ford empire is inheritance. Ford’s position is that of a feudal lord, whose very existence (not to speak of his role in society) is a condemnation of society and its injustices. The UAW has been very nice to Ford in its publicity.
The history of the Ford Motor Company is notorious, especially its speedup record. Keith Sward in his book, The Legend of Henry Ford, has enough goods on the Ford Company to expose it everywhere and to everyone’s satisfaction. Instead of a belligerent expose, the UAW keeps asking Ford to be reasonable.
 
Strike Vote Soft-Pedaled
In the recent strike vote at Ford Local 600, over 30,000 workers approved a strike on the speedup issue, with only 4,000 voting against. This fact has never been emphasized in UAW publicity, even though it would help prove that the issue is a real one, and not caused by factional politics. But since this fact contradicts the “line” that this strike somehow or another was fomented by “Communists,” which conservative Reutherites are busy peddling in Detroit, the truth is ignored or brushed aside.
The UAW leaders have done little if anything to mobilize the rest of the auto workers behind the Ford strikers, under the theory that the strike would not last. Yet only the greatest show of strength of the UAW will impress Ford. This used to be elementary in the UAW, but it appears that many people have to relearn the ABCs they once taught and now have forgotten.
 



AKRON, Ohio. – Behind the press reports 01 the “settlement” of the Goodyear sit-down by the acceptance of a betrayal compromise, are some facts which deserve and need wide-spread publication.
The hope of Goodyear and of the official union leadership that the difficulties in the plants over lay-offs and other grievances were settled by the eight-point agreement received a rude shattering last week.
A group of unionists circulated petitions in the plants calling on the executive board of Goodyear Local Union to hold a special union meeting to take a strike vote. The response to the petitions was good and indicated that the rank and file won’t take any more blows from Goodyear without striking back.
The petitions were a “feeler” of the mood of the rank and file and were hailed as such by genuine progressive militants and revolutionary socialists, who pointed out, however, that a strike over lay-offs already consummated would be incorrect and bring defeat. New issues will arise shortly that can pose the question of strike action.
 
Role of Stalinists
The Daily Worker is striving to paint the betrayal in glowing terms of victory: “They (the rubber workers) went back grinning as the company had been forced to compromise on the union’s demands protesting last Thursday’s lay-offs of 1,600 workers.” (D.W., Nov. 23)
Unfortunately, 1,600 workers didn’t go back grinning. They didn’t go back to work at all. The betrayal agreement sent them into the army of unemployed.
And the circumstances under which the other workers returned to the shop were without precedent here. Although the entire city knew that the sit-down was called off, the city police force and Goodyear’s thugs made a show of force that rankled in the heart of every worker punching his clock card that morning.
Over 150 cops, armed with tear gas and riot guns, stood lined up as the Goodyear workers marched into the plant. It was the most flagrant attempt to terrorize and intimidate the workers Akron has ever seen.
And the rubber workers were boiling mad at this insolence and contempt with which they were being treated. Convicts in a state prison never went to work with such a huge armed force watching them.
To top the insults, the bourgeois press carried pictures of the armed cops with the headline over the photos saying. “They were not needed!” But the implication was clear. Brute force is the only language which the rubber barons are going to speak.
Neither the bourgeois press nor the Daily Worker printed the very significant action of the CIO industrial union council during the Sunday when the National Guards were preparing to march into Akron.
Under progressive leadership, a general strike was planned against the use of the National Guard or any armed force in the Goodyear sit-down. The C.I.O. council met to plan this action.
Workers throughout the city anxiously awaited the decision of Goodyear Local at the Sunday meeting when they were voting on the proposals sponsored by the federal conciliator and the union leadership. The signal for beginning the general strike would have been the announcement of Goodyear Local’s vote to strike.
The National Guard would not be facing inexperienced and leaderless workers as they did in the “Little Steel” strike last spring.
Three years of militant strike struggle, three years of developing class-consciousness; three years of a growing militant and progressive leadership among the rank and file would have made Akron quite a different story than Youngstown.
Machinery and plans for a general strike have been developed by a permanent committee elected in the Central Labor Union. Although the labor split has ended this committee formally, its members are still active in the CIO council and the CLU.
A new chapter in labor history appears in the offing as company plans to announce more layoffs will again pose the question of a strike, the use of the National Guard, and the workers’ defense against military terror.
 



JERSEY CITY, N.J. – The wide-spread publicity given to the C.I.O. organizing drive here because of the outrageous actions of “I am the Law” Mayor Frank Hague revealed the shocking extent to which this sweat-shop area is controlled by the Democratic party machine as a brutal dictatorship without any civil rights for the exploited workers. Labor is terrorized in this city by the cops acting under Hague’s orders. He promised the chamber of commerce that he would keep Jersey City open shop and he’s doing his best in that direction.
 
Raid on Organizers
When forty CIO organizers were run out of town recently and thirteen others were arrested for distributing leaflets, the oppressive conditions here were first exposed.
The railroading of the arrested organizers into prison without any pretence of giving them a fair trial (no jury or bond rights) emphasized the nature of the Democratic party regime here.
Not content with “teaching the C.I.O.” that lesson, Hague closed all union halls and kept C.I.O. unions already organized from holding meetings.
Hague’s influence is not a local affair. Last summer an exposure of Nazi activities in New Jersey brought a demand for a congressional investigation. Hague called Jim Farley, right hand man of President Roosevelt, and told him to get it called off! It was called off.
 
Tie-Up With Roosevelt
Roosevelt’s plurality in New Jersey was due to the Hague machine, and Hague hasn’t been a political boss for twenty years without knowing how to extract benefits for votes given!
Not since the late Huey Long smashed every pretence of so-called democratic government and ruled by the might of the National Guard has America seen a more dangerous menace to Organized Labor than “I am the Law” Hague.
The Hague-Democratic party machine in New Jersey is smoothly organized and operates with the power and influence that only Tammany Hall, in its greatest days, could be compared to it. Besides building a party bureaucracy on the basis of government jobs, Hague has devised a new and more effective method of keeping his machine intact and influential.
 
Basis of Hague Control
Every open shop employer is guaranteed no “labor trouble,” if he allows Hague to control part of the jobs in the plants. Any man going to a factory with an OK by Hague is given work. Hague thus builds his political machine among the workers on the basis of his job distribution power.
Is it any wonder that Hague’s machine has withstood various attacks for the past twenty years?
The employers know the power of Hague’s machine and have been flocking to New Jersey to erect sweatshops because it offers great profit-making possibilities at the expense of the defenseless workers.
 
Appalling Conditions
The state Department of Labor last week revealed that over 34,000 women and children were employed for less than $6 a week working over 40 hours.
It also reported that over 292,000 women were employed at less than $17 a week, which is considered the minimum wage necessary to stave off starvation.
Over 326,000 are employed at starvation wages in New Jersey! Magnificent prospects for profits!
Just as the open shop South threatens the unions in the Northern states because of lower wage levels etc., the Jersey sweatshops not only exploit their own employees but drag down wage scales in nearby areas, especially New York, whose “runaway” factories have settled in Hague’s domain.
Even though the deepening of the crisis makes organizing campaigns infinitely more difficult, the C.I.O. is seeking to smash through the dictatorship over the sweatshops.
One of the leading militants in the C.I.O., Bill Carney, veteran of the Goodyear and General Motors strikes, is directing the C.I.O. campaign in New Jersey.
 
“Underground” Organizing
While the various legal moves of the C.I.O. have been receiving the bulk of the publicity in the drive, the chief work of the C.I.O. organisers remains in carrying out “underground” organizational activity in Jersey City.
Until the workers of Jersey City themselves can be placed in struggles against the Hague machine and the employers whom he represents, the C.I.O. campaign cannot assume major proportions.
Legal battles against Hague have been won, time and again, but he merely ignores the court decisions, with the silent approval of the judges who took office as his men.
The outstanding lesson to date of the Jersey City situation is that the workers who voted Democratic because Roosevelt and his administration pretended to be “friends of labor’’ were deceived and are beginning to realize it.
The sentiment for a labor party is partly based in Jersey on the fact that the workers see they cannot get anything by tagging along with the capitalist parties, Republican or Democratic.
In fighting to smash the dictatorship of Hague and the Democratic machine, the workers learn that until capitalism itself is destroyed the sweatshops will remain.
 



An analysis of the municipal campaigns and elections recently finished gives strong indications that the C.I.O. leadership will try to continue its policy of bartering with capitalist parties and that reaction is growing stronger in the industrial centers.
Without question, industrial workers in key cities were largely united behind the program of the C.I.O., dominated by Labor’s Non-Partisan League in the municipal campaigns.
 
Aid Old Party Men
In New York City, labor’s vote was corralled by the American Labor Party behind its endorsement of the Republican faker, F.H. LaGuardia, running for re-election as mayor. Both the Socialist Party (Right Wing) and the Stalinist Party aided in winning workers’ support for LaGuardia.
The C.I.O. furnished a powerful base in Detroit for its democratic candidate, O’Brien, when the Auto Workers union endorsed and campaigned for him. The S.P. and C.P. were also active in supporting this capitalist politician.
In Akron, the United Rubber Workers union, spent much time and thousands of dollars urging the election of G.L. Patterson. a democrat, who was chosen as “democratic-labor “ mayoralty candidate. In Canton, Ohio, a C.I.O. supported politician ran for mayor.
All the steel and mining areas in Western Pennsylvania were the scene of an intense political campaign conducted by the Steel Workers’ union which endorsed and in some cases, nominated its own choices for municipal office, either on the democratic or republican ballot.
The program of the C.I.O. was a simple one. It revived Labor’s Non-Partisan Leagues, which had been created in 1936 to help re-elect Roosevelt, to act as the political guide of the working class vote. This was its answer to the growing realization of the workers that political action must supplement economic struggle. The C.I.O. top leadership wanted the developing class consciousness, especially of the mass production workers, directed into the safe channels of class-collaborationism, under the slogan of “New Dealism.”
 
Surrender Labor Program
Once the unions voted support of the League, little pretense was made that this was independent working class political action. Quite the contrary. The whole movement was consciously carried into the bosom of the Democratic party. “We’ve got the labor vote, we must woo the regular democrats!” the League officials said. This meant giving up any parcel of the labor program left and becoming democrats, body and soul. (This accounts for the fact that in few industrial centers did the workers vote as a unit. In Akron, only 40 per cent of the union movement voted for Patterson. In Detroit, Homer Martin, Auto Workers president, admitted the union membership didn’t support the League’s candidate).
Mass production workers were looking for independent political action against the capitalists. They didn’t and won’t get it, through present C.I.O. policies.
Outside of New York City, where the trade union bureaucracy is highly skilled through years of practice in the art of misleading the workers, the entrance of the unions into politics was viewed with uncertainty and as an experiment by the C.I.O. leaders. Opportunists to the core, John L. Lewis and his associates, wanted to find out by experience how they could proceed to control the votes of the workers.
The purpose of the C.I.O. in politics was clear to its leadership. They think, falsely and to the detriment of the workers’ interests, that capitalism can be reformed. Lewis and company hope to achieve some reforms of capitalism by gaining control of municipal, state and federal legislators, so that reform laws can be passed. What puzzled the C.I.O. leadership was the method by which they could become a greater political power.
 
National F.L.P.?
Should the C.I.O., with its 3,000,000 members, sponsor a national Farmer-Labor Party? Should it proceed along the People’s Front idea, vehemently advocated by the Stalinists as part of their complete rejection and betrayal of all revolutionary principles? Should the unions seek to capture the Democratic party? The recent elections were to furnish the significant straws in the wind to answer these questions.
It hardly need be added that the furthest thought in the minds of the C.I.O. leaders was the idea of doing anything which might, directly or indirectly, promote the class struggle in the political field and thus prepare the workers to achieve revolutionary socialism.
What were the election results? In New York City, LaGuardia – to the cheers of the capitalist anti-labor press – won decisively. The 489,000 American Labor Party votes turned the trick.
In Detroit, Akron, and Canton, the League’s candidates lost. The Akron defeat, incidentally, was a real shock to the C.I.O. Even the Republicans thought the C.I.O. would win.
A mixture of victories and defeats of the C.I.O. candidates resulted in the Pennsylvania elections.
How did the results of the elections affect the political ideas of the C.I.O. leaders – whose policies will continue to predominate in the labor movement during the next period?
 
“Balance of Power”
“To us, the election has demonstrated beyond doubt that in a national election between democrats and republicans labor will hold the balance of power,” an official C.I.O. spokesman declared. “Now our job is to consolidate those gains, and make good that belief.”
The labor bureaucrats have reasoned in this fashion: In Detroit, we took a beating because our inexperienced union leaders made the issue too much of a labor versus capital dispute. In Akron, they made the same mistake. But in New York City, our policy of not having an independent candidate, or one that appeared to be, brought real success.
It is significant too, that the C.I.O. leaders pose the question of the next national election as a race between the Democrats and Republicans, with the labor vote holding a balance of power.
The writer well remembers a conversation with some top C.I.O. leaders on labor going into politics, a few remarks from which are pertinent. “If we saw some more Farmer-Labor party victories, we’d begin to press for a national party. If we don’t see that, we’ll act as a buffer force between the Democrats and Republicans,” one of them said.
The defeat of the Farmer-Labor party by a Republican candidate in the Minneapolis elections, along with its evident weaknesses elsewhere, threw cold water – at least for the coming period – on any ideas the C.I.O. leaders had in that direction. They’ll be satisfied with supporting “progressive” Democrats or Republicans.
 
A Fatal Faith
In other words, they are prepared to have repeated the experience with Roosevelt during the “Little Steel” strike, over again, on a thousand fronts. All they received from the White House during the massacre at Chicago, the shootings of workers in Canton and Youngstown, was the rebuff, “A plague on both your Houses.” Roosevelt betrayed the workers in the steel strike. He caused thousands of relief workers to face starvation because of the WPA slashes. Yet the C.I.O. leaders again have affirmed their faith in capitalist politicians. The Stalinists shout to the house-tops that they second those policies, which betray the workers.
Revolutionary socialists must point out the utter futility of the political policies of the C.I.O. A return to the militant and progressive policies which built the vast industrial unions is necessary. The reaction in the middle-west developed out of the smashing of the Little Steel strike. It can be blocked from growing only by pursuing a class struggle program against the bosses. Ford’s dynasty in Detroit is the strong-hold of reaction. Organization of Ford workers into a powerful, militant industrial union, would break the backbone of the anti-labor sentiment. The C.I.O. must make this its major task immediately. The road into the Democratic party or any other party based on reform of capitalism is a blind alley for the workers. Not until the workers take the path of revolutionary struggle against the bosses will they be able to find a fundamental solution to their pressing problems.
Just as the workers smashed the open shop and the company unions by fighting independently to form industrial unions in the economic field, they must smash the chains that bind them to the capitalists in the political field.
The immediate and the historic interests of the working class were defended in the municipal elections only by the revolutionary socialists who ran independent candidates in the New York, Minneapolis, Akron and Cleveland elections.
These things the C.I.O. leadership does not understand or understands only too well ... But the rank and file workers, through their own experience and our propaganda, will understand, and will act accordingly.
 



A brazen attempt to save the profits of Big Business by reducing its taxes and cutting down the already meagre relief program is being made by the Roosevelt administration at the special session of Congress that began this week.
Roosevelt admitted in his message to Congress that he was alarmed by the current business recession with its accompanying tremendous lay-offs which reflect the deepening of the basic crisis of capitalism.
The “New Deal” program to meet this crisis was outlined by Secretary of the Treasury Henry Morganthau Jr. in his authoritative speech to the Academy of Political Science a few days prior to the opening of Congress.
“A determined movement towards balancing the budget is one of the needed solutions for today’s problems,” Morgenthau told Wall Street, “to foster the full application of the driving force of private capital.”
 
Cries: Reduce Relief!
The Roosevelt regime hopes to balance the budget through, “reducing relief, farm and public works expenditures,” Morgenthau declared, “and would try to encourage expansion of private industry through revising taxes found to be inequitable.”
This declaration met with the unanimous approval of the American capitalist newspapers. Especially such reactionary papers as the New York Herald Tribune. Why?
Because Big Business has been given a public assurance that the Roosevelt administration will help them maintain profits. Can the capitalists be blamed for cheering?
But what about the workers?
And the unemployed ? What has the Roosevelt regime to offer them ? What does it propose to do about the hundreds of thousands of lay-offs? About the already drastic cuts in relief that have brought misery and starvation?
Every worker who cast his ballot last fall for the re-election of Roosevelt believed that the “great humanitarian and champion of the common people,” would do something to alleviate the burdens of the worker’s lot under capitalism.
In plain, clear, and cold-blooded terms that only the blind could fail to see and understand, Roosevelt informed the workers, through his spokesman Morgenthau, that, “It is necessary to reduce the budget by $700,000,” which can be done, he adds, “through reducing relief, farm and public works expenditures.” Was any betrayal ever announced so frankly and openly? Roosevelt admits that hundreds of thousands have been laid off. That there are millions unemployed. He points that out in his message.
 
“Aid Business,” Keynote
Yet Roosevelt proposes to cut down on the amount of relief in the face of a great increase in the need for relief! “Let them starve,” Roosevelt should have declared frankly. He meant that. His program, if carried out, will bring that.
“Aid Business,” is the key-note of the Roosevelt message to Congress. This, at a time when financial reports indicate that the rubber, auto, steel, oil and other industries are making over 50% more profit this year than in 1936.
“Aid Business,” shouts Roosevelt (to the cheers of Wall St.) while millions of workers face the cold of winter, the misery of starvation, and the other tragedies of unemployment, without even the prospect of a few bread crumbs in the form of relief!
 
Real Program: Save Capitalism
How does the present Roosevelt program differ one iota from that advocated by the “great engineer” Herbert Hoover, late unlamented Republican president of the United States, when he was confronted by the 1929 depression?
Such a strong defender of Roosevelt as the New York Post compares the Roosevelt and Hoover policies as essentially the same!
The revolutionary socialists go one step further. We point out that the programs of all the presidents, Republican, Democratic, are essentially the same. Their purpose is identical, namely to save capitalism.
Many workers have wondered Why Wall Street has insisted that Roosevelt balance the budget. Does not the meaning become clear today? Balance the budget means to cut down relief programs so the taxes can be eliminated which hurt the pocket-books of the rich.
“Our tax revenues come largely from individual earnings and business profits. We do not wish to impose levies which tend to dry up the sources of revenue,” Morgenthau point out. So instead of taxing the rich, the government decides to starve the poor.
More than that, Roosevelt wishes, “to encourage the expansion of business through revising taxes found to be inequitable.” But business considers all taxes they pay as “inequitable.” That’s why Wall Street maintains powerful lobbies in Washington to fight against taxes.
 
Business “Opposition” Disappears
Is it any wonder the business opposition to the special session of Congress has disappeared? The financiers and industrialists worried that perhaps Roosevelt might do something which would hurt them.
Instead, his message and his program as outlined by Morgenthau, told them, in advance, that the special session would be for the capitalists’ benefit and against the interests of the working people.
Talk of legislation for a 30-hour week died completely many months before this session of Congress began. The 40-hour week, too, is considered impractical by the Roosevelt administration! Even a modified wage wage and hour bill received but vague support in the Roosevelt message!
The industrial rulers of America are thus being given a silent approval of their campaign to lengthen the hours of work in the factories. Every economic gain that the organized Labor movement won by determined struggle in the past two years has been placed in acute jeopardy by the Roosevelt policies.
Why does Roosevelt pursue these policies? Why has he made the slogan, “Aid Business,” the theme of his legislative program?
Roosevelt understands that capitalism is a system based on private property of the means of production from which profit is made through the exploitation of labor.
 
What “Prosperity” Means
“Prosperity” under capitalism can only mean that private industry is making enough profit to maintain production schedules which give the workers the means of subsistence.
“The basic need today is to foster the full application of the driving force of private capital. We want to see capital go into productive channels of private industry. We want to see private business expanded. We believe that much of the remaining unemployment will disappear as private capital funds are increasingly employed in productive enterprises.” Morgenthau explained the basic motives of the Roosevelt policy. What does it mean? Is it possible?
Certainly the guarantee that taxes will be reduced is an incentive to big business to use capital for private industry. More important, however, is the basic consideration that profit can only be made by exploiting labor, by having long hours, low wages and poor working conditions: By not paying labor its full due.
The Roosevelt program of ignoring the 30-hour week demand, of passing up a wage and hour bill, assures the capitalists of little opposition from the political direction to their attempts to lower wages etc.
The Roosevelt policy of reducing relief has the effect of making labor cheaper too. The bargaining power of the workers is less when millions are unemployed. It is harder to fight the bosses through strikes to maintain or increase wages when millions of unemployed want jobs. Potential scabs are too plentiful.
 
Workers Must Prepare
In other words, Roosevelt’s program can do only one thing: attempt to save capitalism at the expense of the working people and the masses of unemployed. That’s his encouragement to Big Business.
Even this is impossible, however. The millions of unemployed can’t buy whatever industry produces. Each time that capital spends money in private industry to produce goods, it introduces labor-saving machinery which continues to throw more men out of work permanently.
The home market can’t absorb the goods produced: the foreign markets are tied up by other capitalist nations and a crisis develops, as it has periodically for many decades.
When the crisis can’t be solved by political measures, by allowing millions of working people to starve during what is called a depression: when the workers begin to rebel against the damnable injustices of this vicious capitalist system, the capitalists have two answers.
Either they plunge America into another world war to obtain bigger and more lucrative foreign markets for the goods they produce (which the exploited workers at home can’t buy) or they crush the workers through fascist forces.
Organized Labor can’t and won’t stand for the betrayal of the working people by Roosevelt’s policies. A militant struggle against them must come.
Then, it will be necessary to prepare to keep America out of the next imperialist war, which shall be declared under the guise of “Fighting for Peace and Democracy.”
The workers’ answer to imperialist war and fascism must be the revolutionary overthrow of capitalism, the system of unemployment, misery, starvation, as so strikingly revealed today.
In its struggle against the betrayal policies of Roosevelt, the workers will develop the class-consciousness, the power, and the self-confidence which shall prepare them for the task of overthrowing the capitalist system.
In the vanguard of this struggle, will be found the revolutionary socialists around whose program and banner the fight against capitalism can succeed, as it did 20 years ago in Russia.
 



AKRON, Ohio, Nov. 21. “They licked us again, but it’s
the last time!”
This terse comment by a progressive rubber worker summarized the
Sunday meeting of Goodyear Local where the United Rubber Workers
official leadership shoved down a betrayal proposal that allows 1,600
additional layoffs against which a rank and file sit-down had been
called.
The United Rubber Workers’ leadership abjectly surrendered
to the threat of National Guard strike-breaking, and agreed to an
eight-point, government sponsored program, which gives Goodyear
further opportunity to break the union.
But it took five hours of bitter argument to defeat the rank and
file opposition to the lay-off proposals, which rallied around the
slogan, “All or None. We all work or nobody does.”
The program of the union leadership was a clever one. It was
announced to the sit-downers that a special meeting Sunday would take
up the question of strike action. This and other reports brought the
sit-downers out of the three plants. 
Present N.L.R.B. “Offer”
When the meeting was called to order, John House, Goodyear Local
president and leading reactionary, read the labor board proposals
which the union negotiating committee and the company had agreed to.
The agreement allowed for the lay-off of the 1,600 men who had been
given notices. It established department seniority while the rank and
file demanded, and the union needed, factory seniority. It promised
to rehire the workers on the basis of seniority.
It means that the company policy of getting rid of the militant
unionists by closing down key departments has been sanctioned by the
union!
A counter proposal was offered from the union floor to the effect
that the company be forced to rescind the lay-off orders or a strike
would take place.
Bill Carney, Goodyear unionist and now C.I.O. director in New
Jersey, amended the counter-resolution calling for an immediate
strike vote and action. 
Dalrymple Swings Axe
Then S.H. Dalrymple, president of the United Rubber Workers,
leaped to his feet and rebuked Carney and declared his amending
motion out of order.
“This meeting wasn’t called to take strike action.
It’s unconstitutional. We can’t strike. The National
Guard would defeat us. We haven’t the money for a strike,”
Dalrymple shouted.
Carney indicated that the very life of the union was at stake.
That the C.I.O. had won its first great victory in the Goodyear
strike of 1936. That either the union fought back or it was doomed.
Rank and filers tore the official proposal apart. They called it a
betrayal of union men. For hours the argument continued. But the
steady barrage of defeatist propaganda of the leadership began to
take hold. 
Stalinists Equivocate
The Stalinist spokesman took an ambiguous position, one that
confused the issue and helped the union officialdom. “We don’t
want to see men laid-off but I don’t like the
counter-resolution. It isn’t complete,” he said. He
didn’t make any clarifying motions. He didn’t explain
that he, under party orders, had approved of the evacuation of the
plants, which was the basis for the defeat.
It was the threat of the National Guard action and the realization
that the union leadership wouldn’t fight Goodyear, that swung
the tide. A vote of 1,492 to 822 approved of the union officials’
agreement.
The rank and file is willing to stake its life in a struggle
against the strikebreaking tactics of the National Guard. Sentiment
for a general strike against the National Guard grew hourly in this
city while the Goodyear union was meeting. 
Need Militant Leaders
But the workers have seen what reactionary union leadership does
when a serious crisis confronts it. The rubber workers remember how
the steel workers were betrayed by their leaders in the “Little
Steel” strike. That the National Guard had been called because
the C.I.O. had asked for it.
It takes a militant, class-conscious union leadership to smash the
strike-breaking of the cops, the Guards, and the other governmental
forces of oppression.
A powerful leadership of that kind doesn’t exist in
Goodyear. The progressive have been learning slowly and through
painful experience, such as this Sunday meeting, the need for genuine
left-wing leaders with a program of class struggle.
The sit-down is over. The 1,600 rubber workers join the 21,000
other unemployed in this city. The union continues to retreat.
But not for long.
There will be more lay-offs. Goodyear has already indicated that.
There will be more sit-downs. The mood of the rank and file
guarantees that. Meanwhile the progressives are learning fast.
And when it breaks loose again, there will be no stopping.
Starving men have nothing to lose but their chains and the rubber
workers are realizing it.
 



AKRON, Ohio. – The recent success of the United Rubber Workers of America, CIO affiliate, in winning decisively the sole collective bargaining NLRB vote at Goodyear and Goodrich, and the huge primary vote that Labor’s Non-Partisan League candidates for mayor on the Democratic ticket obtained, have turned national attention again to this rubber center of the world.
For Akron is rapidly becoming recognized as the testing laboratory of the labor movement, particularly of the CIO. And that is why Akron deserves close study.
 
Sit-Down Began Here
Who will ever forget the brilliant wave of sit-downs that swept the country in 1936? Akron rubber workers developed that weapon. They staged over 100 successful sit-downs that year, before the French working class terrified the bourgeoisie of the world by the May sit-down strikes.
The 75,000 rubber workers of Akron of 1920 were permanently reduced to less than 45,000 by 1930 due to technological developments in the industry. Productivity per rubber worker more than doubled, wages remained stationary. The cost of 17 tire price wars in the virtually bankrupt industry was foisted on the rubber workers in the form of wage cuts.
 
Role of A.F. of L.
The A.F. of L. craft unions existed only by the grace of the rubber barons and on condition that no effort would be made to organize the rubber industry, and the rubber workers were helpless until the summer of 1933, when the wave of unionization that swept the nation during the early days of the NRA reached Akron. Thousands of rubber workers flocked into A.F. of L. federal unions.
The A.F. of L. pursued its reactionary course: workers were divided into craft unions; unions were run autocratically; red-baiting against any form of opposition was the chief stock in trade of the A.F. of L. organizers; sell-outs were plentiful. The unions declined in membership from over 35,000 to less than 2,000.
 
Progressives Learn
A new factor appeared on the scene in the fall of 1934. A progressive workers school, agitating for industrial unionism and class struggle policies, was formed under the influence of the Communist League of America (later the Workers Party). Nearly 100 rubber workers, most of them subsequently the union leadership of Akron, attended the school. Some of its students included S.H. Dalrymple, now president of the URWA, L.S. Buckmaster, Firestone Local president, L.L. Callahan, Goodrich Local president, and others. They learned how to fight the A.F. of L. bureaucracy effectively.
The lessons were not in vain. In September 1935, the progressives had forced the A.F. of L. to call a rubber workers’ convention. Despite the personal intervention of William Green, the rubber workers threw out his chief organizer, Coleman Claherty, set up an independent international union based on industrial unionism and adopted a class struggle policy for organizing the industry.
 
Struggle and Victory
Meanwhile, the unrest in the factories developed into temporary stoppages of work, dubbed sit-downs by a reporter. They culminated at Goodyear in the five weeks strike. The rubber workers demanded and obtained the support of the CIO a week after the strike began. What started as a sit-down and walk-out of 500 out of 14,000 Goodyear workers ended in the winning of many concessions. Thousands of rubber workers in other plants, inspired by the Goodyear struggle, joined the URWA. The union was established.
Using the weapon of sit-downs, the rubber workers continued to gain many concessions, to recruit new members, to protest against company policies, fight threats of vigilantism both in Akron and other rubber centers. Akron became the sit-down capital of America.
 
Success Inspiration
The gigantic sit-down wave that shook the foundations of capitalist France added fuel to the fires of the American struggles. From rubber plants they spread to other industries, especially automotive (not the least reason was that Akron militants went into the industry and agitated for sit-downs as the best method of building the United Automobile Workers of America).
The effects of these struggles were not confined to the rubber plants. This entire city of 250,000 felt the repercussions. Grade school children sat down because home assignments were too long! The badly exploited downtown store clerks sat down. Aided by rubber workers, many struggles were successful. Akron was really becoming a union town.
Tired of being robbed by the milk trust, even the farmers near Akron went on strike, 3,000 of them. They called on the progressive and left-wing unionists to help them. A farmers union was organized and the strike was won.
 
CIO Tops Intervene
The convention of the URWA in September 1936 marked the turning point in the history of the local union movement. Under CIO pressure, and the constant barrage of the capitalist press, the convention refused to sanction sit-downs as a weapon of the union. Likewise support of Roosevelt and of Labor’s Non-Partisan League were voted.
Major attention of the leading unionists turned towards organizing the rest of the industry, after the glaring defeat at Gadsden, Ala., where Goodyear thugs smashed the union. With higher wages, better working conditions and definite limitation of production (temporary abolition of speed-up), Akron’s rubber workers began to slip back into their old norms of living.
Militancy, more and more, became a reflection of the great strike struggle elsewhere. The rubber workers kept the local plants going so they could better contribute to the auto, maritime and other strike funds. A fever heat was reached again during the General Motors strike. A general strike slogan raised by revolutionary socialists won wide support. At the last minute it was called off under terrific pressure of the CIO leaders.
 
Bureaucrats Develop
Each problem exposed the limitations of the “progressiveness” of the progressives. A CIO adviser, Allan Haywood, was the power behind the union leaders. When he was sent elsewhere, the official union leadership suffered a severe blow. He had propped up more than one weak union official. The rubber companies, aided by the local press, took up a policy of conciliation. It had its effect. Progressives turned into conservatives. Meanwhile, the best class-conscious elements were doing organizing work elsewhere. Bureaucratic tendencies became stronger.
Under pressure of the rubber companies, leaders of Labor’s Non-Partisan League, and the local press, the executive board removed B.J. Widick, left-wing socialist, as research director of the International Union. The bureaucracy continued to consolidate itself.
 
CLU Liquidated
Central Labor Union, under progressive domination, had done outstanding work. It was the first CLU to support sit-downs. It kept a general strike committee permanently in readiness. It gave funds generously to all strike and other labor struggles. It supported a YPSL fight against R.O.T.C. at Akron University, it refused to allow a split. William Green’s demands were always thrown into a waste basket. The CLU, as the platform of the left-wing, was a thorn in the side of the developing bureaucracies.
A few weeks ago the URWA international officers agreed to allow the rubber workers to be expelled from the CLU upon another request of Green. However, a joint CIO-A.F. of L. council is being formed, sentiment for solidarity is so strong. Of course, the left-wing will be excluded, if possible, from this council.
 
Causes
The growth of conservatism in the local union movement came because of definite, ascertainable reasons, in addition to the specific ones already mentioned.
Foremost of the reasons was the defeat of the “Little Steel” strike. Reactionary forces took heart from labor’s defeat. The widespread barrage of anti-union propaganda intensified, and union officials retreated before it. Roosevelt’s betrayal of the workers created political uncertainty, but the CIO leaders refused to speak out.
Militancy Declines
Akron workers this summer lost their first strike since 1933. City police, heartened by the success Chicago police had in getting away with the Memorial Day massacre, prevented picket lines in the Enterprise strike.
When a rumor spread that Goodrich Local might strike, a company of National Guardsmen appeared in Akron, fully armed and ready for trouble. (Not even a strike vote had been taken. The rumor was completely false.) Six months before, the appearance of guards would have signalized a general strike. But the workers kept quiet: when they had marched to Youngstown, 3,000, to fight the guards during the steel strike, union leaders ordered them home saying that Davey’s guards would protect the strikers.
The rubber companies completed large inventories this summer and also their plans for decentralization of production. They began a campaign of attrition to break the union spirit. Production was lowered to two-day a week schedules. Lay-offs began by the hundreds. “If you don’t like it, strike,” Goodrich told the union committeemen.
Confident that the unions were on the turn, Goodyear and Goodrich permitted the National Labor Relations Board to hold employee elections to determine if the URWA would obtain sole collective bargaining rights. The Unions won 3–1 at Goodyear and 10–1 at Goodrich. Despite the wavering of the leadership, the union rank and file wasn’t on the run. The great lessons of the past three years were not forgotten by the rubber workers.
In order to make this analysis of Akron as clear as possible, we must now refer to the specific political considerations that have been the center of controversy in the labor movement.
 
F.L.P. Scheme
The Stalinists began an intensive campaign for the formation of a Farmer-Labor party in 1936, in Akron as elsewhere.
Gathering delegates from all their stooge organizations, gaining some support from the unions here, the Stalinists called a convention in May 1936. Rubber unions sent observers. Since most of the delegates were either Stalinists or stooges, the movement collapsed, as the revolutionary Socialists had predicted. Attempts to blame the “Trotskyites” failed. The militants wanted independent political action but became disgusted and withdrew when the program adopted was so mild that its best supporters, along with the Stalinists, were the worst reactionaries in the labor movement, like H.B. Blanckenship, vice-president of the CLU at the time, one of Akron’s notorious red-baiters.
The huge rubber workers vote in the last presidential election created the basis for the present political situation. Hungry Democratic politicians saw a possible means of grabbing the spoils of city hall from the entrenched Republican machine. Union bureaucrats saw a source of political power.
 
Democrat Victorious
Labor’s Non-Partisan League, dormant after the Roosevelt re-election, was revived. The Stalinists lost no time in jumping on the band wagon. But they weren’t quite as fast as reactionary A.F. of L. politicians who grabbed leading posts in the League, even though the rubber unions furnished the vote. A municipal judge, G.L. Patterson, a Democrat, was chosen for mayoralty candidate, to run on the Democratic party ticket. He didn’t bother with a program.
Patterson received 17,000 votes in the primary, swamping the other Democratic nominee. The Republican mayor got less than half that figure but he was unopposed. This primary result was hailed as a great victory for labor.
 
No Program
However, subsequent events have already justified the revolutionary socialists who refused to support Patterson and the League’s nebulous political program. The corrupt Democratic politicians, the ward heeler, and other stooges of the capitalist class, and specifically of the rubber barons, are backing Patterson. He is campaigning not as a labor candidate but as a democratic candidate. (The officials of Labor’s Non-Partisan League, meeting with the Democratic chairman, determine this “strategy.”)
In an off moment Patterson told the press, “I expect to go high in Democratic national politics.” A labor candidate? Not an iota more than that faker, LaGuardia, and not as clever, incidentally. Patterson admits he is simply trying to climb higher on the back of the workers. He hasn’t even promised anything to labor, he has no program, yet the union officials are seeking to put him across.
 
Stalinists Right-Wing
And what are the Stalinists doing ? No sooner had the character of this political campaign begun to expose itself and militant workers began demanding a break with the Democratic party, than the Stalinists organizer gave a radio address, begging the workers not to split with the Democrats! The usual attack against the “Trotskyites” also featured his speech. Stalinism is being exposed in all its brutality, hypocrisy, and reformism in this campaign. The Stalinists, to the amusement of many workers, are the right-wing of Labor’s Non-Partisan League!
 
Uncompromising Struggle
Whether Patterson wins or not (his chances are (50–50) a new stage of political development has been reached in this rubber center. Basically, we have an attempt of the bourgeoisie to divert the growing class consciousness of the workers into the safe channels of class-collaboration on the political field.
 



AKRON, Ohio. – The second annual convention of the United Rubber Workers of America recently held here reflected the general development of the CIO movement in the past year.
Tremendous organizational gains furnished the background for the convention. Membership had trebled in the past twelve months. Many important contracts and concessions had been won. Over 250 delegates with 400 votes Were present compared to slightly over 100 at the 1936 convention.
Yet at the very moment the convention was celebrating the victories of the 1937 organizing drive, Goodyear Local voted to allow 1,700 lay-offs, and 2,500 Goodrich unionists were walking the streets, victims of production reductions.
Contrasted to the previous convention with its spirit of militancy, progressiveness, and its tone of class struggle, this convention was a somewhat routine affair.
 
Conservatives Dominant
Caucus meetings held before the convention indicated that the majority of delegates would be in complete agreement with whatever program the present leadership offered and that those who disagreed would be unwilling to struggle unless floor leadership could be offered. The defeat of the left wing candidates for delegates preluded that possibility.
It was no surprise, therefore, when not a voice was raised against a resolution outlawing all forms of sit-downs, although over 50 delegates with a voting strength of nearly 150 were firmly convinced that it is a powerful and necessary weapon. “I didn’t want to stick my neck out,” was the alibi of one progressive who had fought brilliantly at the previous convention for endorsement of the sit-down strike.
Direct pressure of the CIO and officers of the URWA kept Akron delegates from bringing up the case of B.J. Widick, former research director of the union. He had been removed by the executive board without any charges being placed against him and without any hearing.
Early in the convention Widick rejected a CIO suggestion that he make a deal for reinstatement which would, in effect, vindicate the executive board. He refused because that would again place him at the mercy of the board.
Delegates frankly declared they were afraid to buck the CIO or the leadership on that issue, although they recognized its political significance. When a caucus finally agreed to fight for the issue, the convention was about over and the matter couldn’t be brought up.
 
Confusion on War-Fascism
Confusion on political matters was evident throughout the convention and was illustrated in particular by the action taken on the questions of war and fascism.
As one rubber worker said, “This convention adopted a Trotskyist resolution against fascism during one session and then turned around to pass a Stalinist resolution for war.”
After the excellent resolution against fascism was adopted, it seemed that one calling for opposition to all imperialist wars, etc., which presented a revolutionary position would be passed. Instead a muddled resolution calling on Roosevelt to invoke the Kellogg pact against Japan was adopted.
Labor’s Non-Partisan League received unanimous endorsement, as resolutions calling for independent working class political action were tossed aside by the resolutions committee.
However, in one extremely important phase of its work did the convention carry on the progressive tradition of the 1936 convention. A very democratic constitution (compared to all other CIO unions) was adopted. Ample provision for protection of the rank and file and the left wing against attacks by the leadership was made.
 
Constitution Democratic
In the past year, reactionaries have used their position on local executive boards to bring progressives up on charges before them and thus have handicapped them tremendously. Now that power has been taken away from the executive boards and placed in the hands of the rank and file. Severe penalties for unsubstantiated charges are provided. One leading Goodyear progressive was ruined for two months by the false charges brought against him. The convention, incidentally, upheld him.
In terms of trade union perspectives, the convention adopted the correct slogan for the next period of its organizational campaign. “Organize Gadsden and the South!” “Eliminate the Sweatshops.”
Per capita tax to the International was raised to forty cents so that this work could be carried out effectively. Previous tax was thirty-seven cents. Dues remain $1 a month, however.
Since Gadsden, Alabama, has been the scene of terrorism, beatings, flagrant discrimination against union men, and of every other form of oppression, it symbolizes the open-shop reactionary South at its worst. More than one delegate at the convention had been driven out of Gadsden.
Goodyear has a key plant there. Other rubber companies are following it to the South in an effort to escape union labor. A victory there would be a real gain for the entire labor movement. The rubber workers, after two years of failure, will try again to organize it.
Election of officers and executive board members provided the only high light of the convention.
 
Some Progressives Win
The three-year campaign of the left wing and progressive forces against John House, reactionary president of Goodyear Local, finally bore fruit and he was defeated in his three attempts to be re-elected to the executive board. The margins were very decisive.
In the ballot between N.H. Eagle, Ohio district organizer, and considered one of the leading progressives, and L.S. Buckmaster, Firestone Local president and admitted strongest conservative candidate for the board, Eagle won by 230 to 190. Buckmaster later defeated House to return to the executive board.
 



DETROIT, Feb. 17 – The attempt of R.J. Thomas, UAW-CIO vice-president, to make Walter P. Reuther, union president, the scapegoat for the critical situation in the Allis-Chalmers strike, began to boomerang this week.
For John Brophy, as personal representative of Philip Murray, president of the CIO, directly took issue with Thomas on the vicious charges made by Thomas against Reuther.
Besides which, Reuther himself sent a detailed report of all negotiations and actions in the Allis-Chalmers situation. This report presents a devastating case against Thomas!
 
Charges Refuted
The two major charges which Thomas hurled at Reuther by means of statements to the capitalist press were: (1) Reuther violated the union constitution by conferring with the Allis-Chalmers management without the presence of the local union officers; (2) Reuther had made a secret and unsatisfactory agreement with the Allis-Chalmers management and tried to shove it down the local union’s throat before the recent election to determine bargaining rights!
In reality, these charges are what Thomas and his Stalinist brain-trusters HOPED Reuther would do. Not the least of their bitterness and chagrin flows from the fact that Reuther didn’t fall for that kind of trap in the Allis-Chalmers strike.
Instead, as Brophy testifies in his letter, and as substantiated by the minutes of the Policy Committee of the UAW-CIO. every action that Reuther took in the strike was with the approval of the Policy Committee.
Is it a wonder that Thomas ducked away from a meeting with President Philip Murray, Walter Reuther and the other top officers of the UAW-CIO held last week! In every action and in every meeting that Reuther had with management, Brophy was present, representing Murray, who could not come.
As for the second charge about a secret deal, Brophy categorically denies this. Similarly, Reuther presents evidence to show that every “exploratory talk” with the company was made with the full approval of the Policy Committee, was reported in detail beforehand and afterward to the Policy Committee, and that Brother R.J. Thomas was in full agreement!
But to return to the first charge again. The policy that Brophy and Reuther would meet alone with the company, if the company refused to meet with Robert Buse, president of the Allis-Chalmers Local, was agreed to in advance by Thomas and Buse! John Brophy has challenged Thomas to deny this fact!
On the second charge, Brophy in his letter to all UAW-CIO locals says:
“At no time did we make any agreement with the company on any point whatsoever, and in particular we reached no agreement on anything being done about the local situation. Our function was to explore the position of the company and report to the Policy Committee. This was done, and nothing more was done. No agreement was reached even to recommend any company proposals to the Policy Committee.”
But this is only part of the story. The eleven pages of single-spaced writing in the Reuther and Brophy letters give full details on the Allis-Chalmers situation in the past two months, and they provide ample evidence that once again Thomas has hurled “false, malicious and irresponsible charges,” made first in the capitalist press before taking them to the proper union bodies!
Another interesting aspect of this situation, and one which caused a real boomerang against Thomas in his own Local 7 in Detroit, was the fact that on the very day the Allis-Chalmers vote was being taken, one of his chief assistants in Milwaukee, who should have been busy on the Election Day campaign, came to Detroit, appeared suddenly at the Local 7 meeting and read a vicious attack against Reuther issued by Thomas!
What irritated the large membership meeting even more was the fact that only a few days before Local 7 had been asked to send, and did send, two men to Milwaukee to help in the campaign, “because we need everyone possible”!
This latest outburst of Thomas is part of his campaign to regain the presidency as the candidate of the Stalinists and the George Addes-R.T. Leonard bloc. The almost unbelievable lengths to which this bloc has already gone against Reuther, the recklessness of their campaign, testify to the fact that the UAW-CIO is in for its stormiest period.
 



DETROIT, Dec. 20 – If the CIO leadership is somewhat timid and conservative in explaining to its millions of members the profound significance of its new wage drive, big business is losing no time in coming to grips with the basic problems posed by the CIO demands.
The latest pronouncement from one of Wall Street’s mouthpieces, Alfred P. Sloan, chairman of General Motors, is a good sample of what the real rulers of America, the big capitalists, are thinking.
“The idea that a wage increase is justified by an increase in living costs is an economic absurdity,” declared Sloan this week. In its own way, this stands alongside the classic reply of Marie Antoinette before the French Revolution, to the cries of the hungry for food: “Let them eat cake!”
 
Capitalist Razzle-Dazzle
Let us take a quick glance into a conference room where CIO officials are trying to negotiate a wage increase with General Motors, for example. “Food prices are up, rent is up, clothes cost more, then men just can’t make a living for their families at present auto wage scales,” the union officials would declare, backed by a wealth of statistics that even the company couldn’t deny. GM’s answer would be: “Cost of living is up. So what?”
The point is that Sloan’s remark is a perfect illustration of the real attitude of Wall Street toward the people of America as a whole. And when CIO leaders talk about “the joint responsibility of labor and industry to solve America’s economic problems,” they are just kidding themselves and fooling the men in the shops, for industry recognizes no such responsibility. Industry’s business is making profits, and it sticks to it. The rest is just razzle-dazzle to keep the uninformed, uninformed, and the timid labor leaders, timid.
”The momentous problem of our day,” Mr. Sloan pointed out, “is the position of labor as a component group of the American economic structure.” The future of the system of capitalism – “free enterprise” – depends on what becomes of the position of labor in America, he warned his fellow industrialists. Thus, the major aim of the big industrialists in the coming wage struggles is to preserve the capitalist society. They are worried about the power they know – far better than most union men know – that organized labor contains within itself.
To carry out their strategic aim – saving capitalism – the industrialists have a set of tactics. These were outlined in a nine-point program of Mr. Sloan. “Collective bargaining on an industry-wide basis should be prohibited as monopolistic practice,” Mr. Sloan says. Outlaw the closed shop, keep foremen from being organized, etc., etc.
 
Relies on Government
The important thing about the proposals of Mr. Sloan are the kind of action they involve. In each case, Mr. Sloan insists that the government act to carry out his program against labor.
This is significant from two points of view. Certainly the coal strike emphasized again what every industrialist knows: organized labor today is too powerful to be smashed the “old-fashioned way.” That is, labor is too powerful today for direct union-busting campaigns. So labor must be strangled, hog-tied, emasculated and weakened by a Series of flank attacks. One aspect of this is constant provocations in plants against the union militants, namely, the stewards.
But the decisive aspect – and this labor must learn – is that Sloan and his Wall Street associates see the value of having the government do the anti-union job. They understand that this is a function of the capitalist government in Washington. The Truman administration and the court system have demonstrated this again and again.
The control of the nation rests in political power. Wall Street has that political power through its domination of the government which is its agency. What the CIO leaders, and John L. Lewis in the coal strike, failed to recognize is that fundamental fact about the relationship between “labor-management and the government,” to use one of their phrases.
 
Political Action
In deciding the strategy and tactics of the union movement in the fight for wage increases, aq indispensable part of a plan for victory is an accurate estimate of the enemy. Sloan’s speech should clarify any doubts on his views and the views of Wall Street. Truman’s role should bring some light on the question of the function of the government.
Only to the extent that this is understood will the CIO be in a position to fight a victorious struggle. Only to the extent that organized labor takes up the challenge of the capitalists will it be able to make genuine advances in the interests of the working people.
Wall Street has its government in Washington. When is organized labor going to start the building of a political force for its own government there? This is part and parcel of the coming struggle called the “CIO wage drive.” The coal miners’ strike emphasized this necessity. Mr. Sloan’s speech indicates that Wall Street appreciates this fully. The job ahead is to arm the labor movement with a sound and fundamental estimate of the situation and to hammer out a clear-cut strategy and flexible tactic for the struggle.
 



DETROIT, Jan. 26 – Isolated in the top leadership of the UAW-CIO, Walter P. Reuther, union president, finally has gone directly to the ranks for support in his serious situation.
At two well attended meetings on the west and east sides of Detroit, Reuther outlined the story of the bitter factional struggle raging on the international executive board, at which every important suggestion he has offered has been disapproved by the George Addes-R.J. Thomas-Richard T. Leonard-Stalinist bloc. Even when the majority bloc agreed on policy, they turned down his motions, and made their own, Reuther declared!
 
Proposed Conference
The main charge he made was that this bloc put factional interests above the union interests, and Reuther gave a series of examples to prove his point. The reduction of important departments under the guise of economy at a time when heavy expenses were occurred in less essential work, was one example. One special example was the request of Reuther for another person in the important unemployed compensation department. Even though a majority of the Addes bloc agreed to the idea, it was vetoed because two members of that bloc were against it. “Anytime anyone in our caucus is against a proposition we are pledged to vote against it,” Addes said, according to Reuther.
Reuther told his audiences of a special offer he made months ago to the anti-Reuther bloc. He proposed that both sides hold a joint national conference attended by rank and filers, and both sides debate their differences and a program for the union. He pledged in advance he would abide by what the majority of the rank and file advocated. This proposal was turned down.
 
Promises AC Story
Reuther also told of a bid made to him by the Stalinists. When he spoke for unity at a board meeting, an important Stalinist intermediary told him: “If you want to talk over unity, don’t bother with them (IEB members) but see us.”
This incident was part of the attack Reuther made against the Communist Party. He repeated his attack against “outside interference,” “party guys,” the. CP stand during the war for incentive pay and the speedup, the flip flops before and after the Stalin-Hitler pact. He criticized “people who put political interests before union interests.” The ambiguity of his stand indicates that Reuther hasn’t fully made up his mind what kind of tactics he is going to use in fighting the Stalinists. It is significant that he spoke of his bloc with Philip Murray, CIO president, in all his moves.
Reuther did not deal at length with the Allis-Chalmers situation, although it is a well-known fact that he holds the Stalinists primarily responsible for the prolongation of that long-drawn out strike. He promised a full and complete story on that soon.
 
Ambiguous Program
Insofar as his own program is concerned, Reuther reiterated his fundamental idea of higher wages without price increases, and outlined as a must in the next period a national united labor conferences of the CIO, AFL and independent unions, to adopt a basic labor legislative program, a united defense fund, and to solve jurisdictional disputes within labor.
At one of the meetings, in response to a question as to why he didn’t support a labor party program, he repeated his time worn alibi of “the time is not ripe, etc., etc.” Reuther was rather ambiguous on the matter of defining “honest trade union policy” vs. “politics,” and he left doubt in the audiences mind just what he was talking about.
The enthusiasm of both audiences to his talk showed that his popularity among the rank and file remains high, for most of the audiences consisted of workers from the shops. Another significant indication was an incident in region 1-D where Kenneth Forbes, regional director, switched from Reuther’s camp to the opposition. At a meeting of executive board members and officers of local unions in the Grand-Rapids-Muskegon area, Forbes’ new policies were rejected by an overwhelming vote, with a few abstentions.
The coming local union elections next month and March in which Reuther and anti-Reuther slates will compete in most elections, will show the trend in the UAW-CIO. Reuther urged his followers to concentrate on that problem in the next couple of months.
 




Left, Right and Center
by Sidney Lens
445 pp. Henry Regnery Co. $4.00
Somewhat belatedly we should like to comment on one of the few worthwhile labor books published in 1949. Sidney Lens’ analysis of the conflicting forces in American labor is a genuine contribution to any serious understanding of America’s trade unions.
Lens’ penetrating observations of business unionism, his critique of CIO class collaboration, his devastating exposé of Stalinism’s reactionary labor role, have not sold the book, but have doomed it to almost total disregard in the labor movement. It is true, of course, that Ammunition, the UAW-CIO monthly publication, did review it favorably, but that was an exceptional incident, even for the UAW-CIO, some of whose leaders have since learned to fear if not respect the power of ideas in books.
Among the many popular misconceptions which Lens destroys is one relating to racketeering in the union movement. Lens takes some of the notorious cases of recent years such as the Willie Bioff-Hollywood movie czars’ agreement, and penetrates to the basic roots of this scandalous condition which is treated in the daily newspapers as if it were a sin confined solely to unionism. “The source of racketeers in the labor movement, then, is obvious,” Lens concludes his chapter on Racketeers and Their Allies. “Such men could hardly last five minutes without direct connivance of an employer or of a city political machine or both. They couldn’t stay in business for a moment unless they could provide additional profits for unscrupulous employers or benefits for a political machine.”
In rather compressed style, and thus perhaps unavoidably doing a certain injustice to the period, Lens sketches the history of radical movements in the labor movement, giving appropriate credit to the socialists and Wobblies of other days. But it is difficult to believe that on second thought Lens would write so sloppy a sentence, in dealing with the Stalin-Trotsky struggle, as this one: “The difference between Trotsky and Stalin as day to day politicians at that time (1923–27) can probably be summarized by the fact that, whereas Stalin knew how to agree with anything ‘in principle,’ and then cut the heart out of it in practice, Trotsky, who fought viciously on matters of principle, yielded like a lamb in most matters of practice.” Fortunately, the book as a whole avoids such insupportable assertions.
So little seems to be known today of the mass struggles which preceded the emergence of the CIO that Lens’ section on the Turning Point and the New Deal deserves to be very widely read. It simply isn’t true that the Stalinists led the big pre-CIO fights and that John L. Lewis and Franklin D. Roosevelt organized the CIO. The facts are there to see, and Lens presents them. However, we must quarrel with one important political opinion which Lens states in evaluating that turbulent epoch in labor history. “The sands of time were running low for those elements in the AFL leadership who recognized that the Green policy was incapable of checking the advance of radicalism. After three years of turmoil, growth, strikes and confusion, the Committee for Industrial Organization was formed in 1935 precisely for that purpose.” This is more than mere over-simplification. It gives a lop-sided viewpoint on the historic importance of the CIO – and underestimates John L. Lewis nearly as much as a shoddy work like Saul Alinsky’s John L. Lewis overestimates him. But this is an old quarrel between Lens and ourselves, and it should not be permitted to detract from the overall value of his book.
We think a real service to the labor movement would be done if a nation-wide discussion in union circles could be started on Lens’ ideas for the labor movement. These proposals are:

amalgamation of the craft unions into an industrial structure;
 
unity of the AFL, CIO, railroad Brotherhoods, independent unions, etc.;
 
establishment of flexible councils of workers elected from related plants, related industries, or related geographical points;
 
rearming the city central bodies in both the AFL and CIO with the autonomous rights at least to conduct local organizational campaigns and give active guidance in local strikes;
 
creation of unions for the unemployed – both on relief and work projects – with the united federation of labor;
 
formation of an educational alliance of progressive, socialist, and semi-socialist elements within the unions, whether AFL, CIO or independent, as a counterweight to both Stalinism and business unionism.

This last point we think particularly important.
As an active man, an unaffiliated radical, and an author, Lens has done his share to contribute ideas toward a further advance of the union movement. His book consequently merits serious attention.
 

  DETROIT – The first reaction to the Ford Motor Company offer of 11 cents an hour for those workers making less than $1.50 now, and 14 cents for those whose hourly rate was higher than $1.50 was recorded at the state CIO convention by delegates attending from Local 600. They booed the announcement of the Ford offer. Also in the Ford offer was a proposal that the union and company set up a joint committee to study the incentive wage system with the idea of putting it into practice everywhere in the Ford plants! Of course, this entire proposal is quite a reversal of Ford’s recent announcement that he would demand a wage cut from the UAW-CIO negotiators. At the present writing, full details of the Ford proposals are not available, and the UAW-CIO has refrained from any official statement, pending study of the Ford offer. But the boos of the 80 delegates from Ford Local 600 indicate the UAW-CIO isn’t going to accept this first proposal. * The Michigan state CIO convention is being held this week at Grand Rapids. It serves each year to reflect the strength of the various political tendencies, and big caucuses in the UAW-CIO. The incumbent administration, headed by Gus Scholle and Barney Hopkins, is strictly pro-Reuther, and has been that way since the big fight in the 1946 convention. There is little doubt that this leadership will be re-elected by a bigger margin this year than in 1947. In 1946, to refresh some memories, the vote between the two main forces,the Scholle-Reuther bloc and the Addes-Stalinist bloc, was very close. This year the Stalinist bloc, united mainly on the Wallace for president issue, and general opposition to Scholle, will probably receive no more than one third of the votes. The big question at this convention will be political action. Although Walter Reuther as yet has not taken public responsibility for the action, the fact is that his followers are supporting Mennen Williams, the ADA and AVC liberal, for governor on the Democratic Party ballot. Gus Scholle is openly taking the lead in this maneuver. His political policy, which is meeting with opposition from within the Reuther camp, as well as the opposition, is to capture the Democratic Party of Michigan. It remains to be seen how much Labor Party sentiment is expressed, and is evident at this convention. Labor Action will carry a full report on this convention next week.   
  DETROIT, June 12 – The shocking and brutal killing of a 15-year-old Negro youth – the fourth such case in the past year – at the hands of Detroit cops last week has raised tempers to an explosive pitch in this industrial center, and sharpened an already acute political crisis. Over 3,000 Negroes and many whites attended the funeral of Leon Mosely, the youth killed by the cops,in protest over the “legal lynchings” that continue here. Not very long ago, a 13-year-old Negro boy was shot and killed by Detroit cops. The burning indignation, especially in the Negro community, over this latest police outrage came from the fact that many witnesses testified that the two cops beat the youth terribly, after dragging him from a car (subsequently reported as stolen) and then shot him as he staggered away from their murderous slugging.  Investigation Demanded The reaction to this killing was spontaneous. No one organized the funeral protest. Hundreds of Mosely’s fellow students at Miller school came to the church where the services were held. Over 2,000 persons were unable to get into the church. Afterward a large part of this crowd marched to City Hall and demanded that the police be brought to trial. Demands for an inquest forced action, and a coroner’s report is supposed to be made public next Wednesday. Meanwhile, the atrocity has been given such wide attention that Police Commissioner Harry S. Toy announced today the suspension of the two policemen involved. They are Patrolmen Louis Melasi and John Boland. Of course, the Communist Party was quick to exploit this situation. They issued a leaflet blasting Detroit’s killer cops and they were prominent at the funeral services. As a result, the daily newspapers are trying to divert the whole situation into a “red scare” and thus avoid the real problem, which is the policy and conduct of the Detroit police department under the direction of Harry S. Toy, the police commissioner. In this despicable attempt to avoid police responsibility, the newspapers are being aided by some reactionaries and other people who should know better. Police Commissioner Toy long ago gave “shoot to kill” orders, and Detroit cops are very quick-triggered. The Negro press is filled constantly with stories of police brutality to Negro prisoners. The Detroit police department demonstrated its vicious Jim Crow feelings in the race riots in 1943. Commissioner Toy repeatedly has made irresponsible statements against “reds,” has made anti-Semitic statements and even declared publicly that Henry Wallace supporters should be shot. He amended the last statement, after criticism arose, that he meant after a trial! The political responsibility for the death of this Negro youth rests in the first place on Toy. His removal should be demanded, and obtained. As a matter of fact, however, Toy’s suspension of the two cops is an attempt on his part to avoid any such move, and make the two policemen alone the “scapegoats” for his policies. The task of cleaning up this scandalous situation belongs not to the agitation of the Communist Party, but to the powerful United Automobile Workers, CIO. All the FEPC work of the UAW-CIO becomes a mockery if the union avoids plunging into this fight against police brutality. Until the union movement becomes the most active and aggressive fighter against Jim Crow in every phase of Detroit life, the Communist Party is going to utilize these tragedies, and wailing and gnashing of teeth by opponents of the Communist Party are just so much hypocritical hogwash. The Negro people have every right to demand that the UAW-CIO take the leadership in this fight, and if the union movement doesn’t, any gains the Communist Party makes are the responsibility of the union movement.  Challenge to UAW The kind of indignation which swept the unions over the attempted murder of Walter Reuther should be aroused over every killing of a human being, no matter what his race,creed or color, when injustice and lynch law are involved. The union movement should have nothing but contempt for the kind of statements issued by Oscar Cohen, executive secretary of the Jewish Community Council, in connection with the Mosely killing. Cohen said: “We have a feeling the Communists are going to provoke a riot, and if the situation does not arise spontaneously – which it might because of the feeling in that neighborhood – the Communists will attempt to provoke the police into a fight. We are afraid of a considerable disturbance.” The only purpose such a statement serves – and Tom Downs of the Michigan CIO Council made a similar statement – is to give the police an alibi if they decide to “put the N_______ in their place,” by provoking violence and killing Negroes as they did in the 1943 race riots. Killer cops, not the Communist Party, is the agitator among the Negroes in Detroit today. It was the cops who killed Mosely! It begins to look as if public protest is great enough in this particular case to get some action against the two policemen. But this is hardly a solution to the real problem, which is the whole policy of the Detroit police department. Not until Commissioner Toy is removed, until the policemen are convicted on murder charges, until the whole police department policy is changed, and the force reorganized, will there be any semblance of peace, and a decrease in the terrific tensions in the Negro community here. The whole Jim Crow atmosphere in Detroit, the rent-gouging and terrible housing shortage, especially as they affect the Negroes, combined with the repeated police brutalities, are combining to make Detroit a powder keg of social tensions. The danger of another 1943 riot is in the air. Making protests against race riots and condemning policemen after Negroes are killed are hardly solutions to the problem. The union movement must join with the Negro community now to bring some democratic rights and ordinary legal protection to the 250,000 Negroes living and working here. The UAW-CIO faces another important challenge which it must meet.   
  DETROIT, May 30 – Out of the differences between the General Motors settlement and the Chrysler agreement has arisen a real debate in the United Automobile Workers-CIO,which is only beginning at the meetings to ratify the contracts. The UAW-CIO is in for another discussion period which should serve to further educate its ranks. For an understanding of this debate, certain facts regarding the settlements are necessary. Although some details are not yet available, the main facts are. GM’s offer of an “escalator” or cost of living clause was a surprise to UAW-CIO circles, including the entire leadership. However, Walter Reuther gave a go-ahead signal to his two assistants in GM, John Livingstone, UAW vice-president, and Tom Johnstone, assistant GM director of the UAW-CIO. Emil Mazey, acting union president,was not in the final negotiations, just as he stayed out of Chrysler negotiations, in order to allow the people in charge of those departments full credit for any gains. The GM agreement was signed before consulting the international executive board. In spite of this situation, when the IEB did meet, they approved the idea of an escalator clause, and urged Norman Mathews, Chrysler director,to get a similar settlement. One other important background fact: Over two months ago GM put out a feeler to Walter Reuther, asking if the UAW-CIO would take 9 cents an hour and some changes in the contract that would guarantee “production consciousness” among the GM workers. In an informal poll of the IEB, most of the members were willing to bite on the feeler. However, Walter Reuther and Emil Mazey spoke strongly against it, and they insisted that in this period of huge profits, the UAW-CIO must fight to get more. Mazey’s repeatedly expressed theory has been – as against those who were against any strikes (“the time is not now.”) – that “if the UAW-CIO can’t win strikes for higher wages in a period of relative prosperity and huge profits, when can it do so, during a depression?”  Leadership Divided Right after the GM settlement, the Stalinists began a real campaign against the escalator clause and the whole agreement. A stooge introduced a resolution in Plymouth Local 51, denouncing it. They put pressure on Mathews and Richard T. Leonard, one of the Chrysler negotiators. Their main argument was that the UAW was accepting the principle of “wage cuts.” Mathews refused to go along with the idea of an escalator clause. “I haven’t got any use for fancy economics,” he told people, thus repeating a remark that the late, unlamented R.J. Thomas said a couple of years ago about the GM strike program, before the ranks retired him from leadership in this union. Mathews accepted a flat 13 cents an hour wage increase in negotiations, turned down the idea of an escalator clause, and extended the present Chrysler contract, with its “company security clauses,” for an extra year, namely June 1950, with an additional provision that wages might be re-opened once during this two years. Thus the united UAW-CIO leadership found itself divided, Mathews breaking on this issue with the Reuther leadership. (Perhaps if Reuther had been active in the situation instead of being confined to bed with his injuries, this might have been different.) What happened really is that Mathews succumbed to the pressure of the Stalinists, and his own lack of understanding of the escalator clause. Instead of the Chrysler workers getting more than GM, in terms of cash, and an escalator clause, they find themselves without any safeguards against a rising cost of living. One of the main arguments the Stalinists used against the escalator clause is that prices might go down, and then GM workers would lose 5 cents of their wage increase. Of course, in practice, the Stalinists go further than what appeared in the Daily Worker. They don’t say that prices could go down, they say prices will go down, so GM workers will lose 5 cents, so the GM contract is bad. However, in the Sunday Worker May 30, the resolution of the central committee of the Communist Party has a section outlining the reasons why in America today living costs will rise. This double talk is typical of the Stalinists. Their only interest is to create confusion, and to try to exploit the situation for FACTIONAL gain. Another criticism they made was that the GM contract was for two years, and two-year contracts are bad (as they are!). Now that Mathews signed a two-year contract, they either shrug off that argument, or try to minimize the company security clause in the Chrysler contract. Certainly, after the GM settlement, the Chrysler pickets were in a good position to get MORE. They had Chrysler on the spot. Better handled negotiations could have achieved this result. The confusion which the Stalinists are forcing may work sufficiently to cover them up for a brief period. But the rising cost of living – and a GM wage increase – will settle both that argument and Mathews. We say that the main responsibility now for any opposition to the escalator clause in UAW contracts belongs to the Stalinists. But this by no means excuses the Reuther leadership from its blunders on this score. Only a couple of months ago Walter Reuther went to Flint and debated against Jack Palmer, then president of Local 659. Palmer advocated an escalator clause. Reuther denounced it as impractical. Small wonder that Mathews is confused, and was unwilling to accept it. Before wage negotiations began, both the GM and the Chrysler wage conferences turned down the idea of an escalator clause. It was one of those “Trotskyite” ideas of the Workers Party and the Socialist Workers Party. Readers of Labor Action may recall that this newspaper, along with The Militant, were the only two labor papers vigorously promoting this idea. We emphasized higher wages without price increases, plus the escalator clause, as a sound policy in wage negotiations. The Militant advocated mainly if not exclusively, the idea of the escalator clause – or sliding scale, as it chooses to call it. (In subsequent articles we’ll deal with the question of the SWP’s policies in the current wage struggle.) The Reuther leadership was caught unprepared by GM, despite the Stalinist talk that this whole thing was cooked up long ago by Reuther. (If Reuther were going to negotiate privately for an escalator clause he hardly would have fought so vigorously against it recently.)  Valuable Discussion There is one other special fact that must be given proper recognition. The debate in the UAW-CIO does not take place in an atmosphere of gloom or defeat. The argument is over what is the best wage policy to get the most from the companies,considering the general state of the American labor movement. In this debate, many of the ranks will be drawn into the discussion,and, in the final analysis, the UAW-CIO rank and file will decide the issue. This is in keeping with the splendid democratic tradition of the UAW-CIO. In steel, electric and other unions which got nothing or very little, compared to the UAW-CIO, the first lesson is very clear. Build a militant, democratic union, along the lines that symbolize the UAW-CIO, and you have an instrument that can protect your elementary economic interests in the shop.   
  DETROIT – If the results of the election conducted by the National Labor Relations Board at the Ford plants throughout America had been different, the news would have been plastered all over the front pages of the capitalist newspapers. But the fact that 98 per cent of the Ford workers who turned out to vote approved the union shop was not a pleasant fact for the capitalist press. And the fact that over 90 per cent of the eligible voters participated in the balloting also was something the anti-labor forces didn’t like to admit. The vote for the union shop put the Ford Motor Company right behind the eight-ball in negotiations. John Bugas, personnel director of the Ford company, didn’t like it. The whole strategy of the Ford company was collapsing.  Vote of Confidence The UAW-CIO has a real vote of confidence among Ford workers. That, is the significance of the terrific vote for the union shop. It is emphasized by the circumstances of the election. Ford would not permit it on company grounds. The voting booths were inconveniently arranged. But the workers poured out in mass to show they want unionism of the kind that the UAW-CIO symbolizes. Of course, the UAW-CIO leadership rejected the first offer made by Ford, as reported recently in Labor Action. Negotiations are continuing this week with a deadline of Thursday, when a national delegate conference of Ford workers will have the final say on a strike vote. This week Walter Reuther, UAW-CIO president, personally entered negotiations, right arm in cast, bodyguards around; and he served notice on the company that a satisfactory offer had better be made or Ford would face a walk-out. The excellent response of the Ford workers to the union campaign reflects the growing confidence that began with the GM and Chrysler settlements. Another important aspect of the Ford vote on the union shop is that it dealt a blow to the Taft-Hartley law and its anti-union originators. The theory behind this part of the law was that if only workers had a secret ballot they would vote against “union shop and union bosses.” The workers in the shop demonstrated by their vote, just as they used to do under the provisions Of the Smith-Connolly wartime law, that they are solidly union-conscious and ready to advance along those lines.  Ford Is Unhappy One little incident that occurred recently shows how the UAW-CIO is seizing the opportunity offered it. Ford company negotiators were late one morning at the conference table. Ken Bannon and the other union negotiators didn’t wait for the Ford big-shots to arrive. The union negotiators met the Ford men at the entrance as the unionists were leaving and the Ford men arriving. “We’ll see you at 2:00 p.m. at the regular session. We have things to do now,” Bannon informed the Ford men. We understand the company men haven’t been late since then. The Ford Motor Company is also unhappy about the fact that the union won’t release joint progress statements with them. And Mr. Bugas almost blew his top when Nathan Weinberg, UAW-CIO research director, made his analysis of Ford’s wages and the union’s just demands. “Socialist crap,” were the words Bugas used in describing Weinberg’s factual report. Things just aren’t going according to the Ford Motor Company schedule. Nor are the anti-Reuther cliques within the UAW-CIO finding much good fishing in the troubled waters. The UAW-CIO is determined to get a substantial gain from Ford, and it is off to a good start.   


The Many and the Few
by Henry Kraus
The Plantin Press, Los Angeles 1947
If Henry Kraus’ book on the great 1937 General Motors sit-down strike did nothing else than remind the trembling bureaucrats of the CIO that this powerful organization was built through class struggle, it would serve a useful purpose. It is also a valuable source of study for younger militants who were not fortunate enough to participate in that significant period of turbulent labor history. For much of what Kraus writes is accurate, descriptive and revealing, in spite of the inevitable factional slant of the author, one-time editor of the United Automobile Worker and active participant in the GM strike. The Daily Worker’s complaint that Kraus underplayed the role of the Stalinist party in the GM strike indicates that he did try to see further ahead than his pro-Stalinist vision ordinarily would permit.
For example, the Reuther brothers, Victor, Roy and Walter, come out looking pretty good in this book, in spite of Kraus’ obvious hero-worship of his old-time associate, Wyndham Mortimer, and his exaggeration of the work of Robert Travis, organizational director in the Flint area. In fact, the Reuther brothers look all the more impressive when described by a factional opponent. Homer Martin flashes through this book, as he did through the UAW. So do other labor figures, many of whom have since passed into obscurity. The book is good background reading material, in a word, for those who are vitally interested in the UAW and the labor movement as a whole.
The most significant part of this book treats with the politics and the national personalities of that day. Regrettable indeed that this wasn’t written with the kind of critical and analytical approach that marks a book like Charles Rumford Walker’s American City. Walker drew the social and political forces operating in the Minneapolis strikes in clear-cut pictures. The politics in Kraus’ book are indirect. We are not speaking of the inner-union politics, but rather of the major political forces operating in the GM strike struggle.
Perhaps unintentionally, Kraus does a neat job of destroying some of the myths built up around the persons of Franklin Delano Roosevelt and former Governor Frank Murphy, long heralded as outstanding “friends of labor.” Kraus relates the story of the first break between John L. Lewis and President Roosevelt. It took place during the GM strike, when Roosevelt called Lewis to the White House and demanded that Lewis order the GM workers to go back to work, without a contract. That was Roosevelt’s sole contribution to the auto workers, engaged in a life-and-death struggle. If Lewis had done nothing else but say no to this outrageous strike-breaking demand, his role would have been progressive. Lewis stood by the auto workers, he poured funds and qualified organizers into the strike and personally came to Detroit to handle negotiations!
As for Governor Murphy – the epitome of the New Deal liberals – he demanded that Lewis back down from his demands on GM and that he get the sit-downers to evacuate the plants or he’d send the National Guard into the shops to clear them out. Lesser men might have quailed before this threat of a “friend of labor,” but Lewis merely told the Governor that in those circumstances he’d have to leave the conference immediately to join the sit-downers so he could be there when the troops came to clear them out! The counter-pressure worked and Murphy took a “middle of the road” position again. Lewis understood the temper of the sit-downers. Murphy was a befuddled politician.
How amusing to read the special explanation in Kraus’ preface on why he gives the facts showing Lewis’ progressive role in that period. Since the break in 1941 between Lewis and the Stalinists, he was nothing but a devil to them. In fact, they even called him a fascist. No doubt Kraus wanted to soften the blows his Stalinist audience might have in reading about Lewis. They aren’t very happy about the build-up this book gives Walter Reuther, either.
We know that many of the participants in the GM strike disagree with this or that aspect of the description Kraus gives either of a specific event or of individual roles. Certainly his sharp attack on Kermit Johnson, Flint strike leader, is contradicted by other accounts written of those days. As an example, Rose Pesotta in her autobiographical work, has a much higher and more accurate evaluation of Johnson. So do others.
 
The GM Empire
This book concerns, itself primarily, and properly so, with the tense struggles at Flint, heart of the GM empire. The Battle of Bulls Run, the capture of Chevy 4 and other highlights of the strike will refresh the memories of old UAW militants and bring back that feeling that was the mark of a CIO man in those great days.
The GM strike furnished important lessons to all labor. The sit-down strike got its biggest test and won its biggest victory as a new and powerful tactic of labor. But more important than the tactical lessons are the political implications of that struggle. The GM workers rallied the decisive masses of American people behind them through their bold, fight and uncompromising opposition to the Wall Street owners of General Motors. They proved what class independence, class action and class leadership could do. They showed what class power labor possesses. Those factors brought victory for the CIO. They are the source of a successful labor program for this epoch of Taft-Hartley laws and the general anti-labor drive.
 



DETROIT – The biggest mass layoffs since the great depression of the 1930s continued in this auto center this week, as two big corporations fought for monopoly control of the artificial gas supply to the city. The timing of the “gas shortage” and layoffs came somewhat suspiciously just before the UAW-CIO began its negotiations with the auto corporations for higher wages! Especially hard hit by the shutdown are Chrysler workers, over 50,000 of whom have worked only two days in two weeks! And the Chrysler union wage conference comes this week!
Except for Ford, which has its own gas plants, most of the auto industry gets its gas from the Michigan Consolidated Gas Company, one of the many subsidiaries of the Morgan-Mellon Wall Street crowd. Michigan Consolidated gets the gas it sells to the auto industry from the Panhandle Eastern Pipeline Corporation, which today has a monopoly because of its control of the pipelines through which the supply comes here.
Michigan Consolidated shut down its industrial supply, saying there was a shortage during the cold wave due to excessive use. It wants to whip up the public to back it in getting the right to build a pipeline, and drive Panhandle from business. Panhandle facilities are inadequate for long emergencies. While this fight for monopoly control continues, over 200,000 industrial workers sit home, unable to work and cutting into their rock-bottom financial reserves, if they have any.
Under the new unemployment compensation law which went into effect on January 1, partial payments are excluded, so that the thousands of workers who worked only two days from January 21 to 31 received nothing in partial unemployment benefits. For the week of February 1 to 8 they receive their primary benefit rate, or must establish a new claim.
Plans to reopen the plants on February 9 were cancelled by auto companies when, for some “mysterious” reason, the gas shortage was not relieved, although the weather was not anywhere nearly as cold as predicted. In fact, it looks more every day as though the auto companies decided this was a good excuse for a kind of unofficial lockout to cool off the unionists who are determined to fight for a living wage.
 



DETROIT, Feb. 15 – Within 10 days Chrysler Corporation will be asked to grant a series of demands approved at the two-day wage conference of the UAW-CIO attended by delegates representing all Chrysler shops.
The Chrysler workers’ conference approved a resolution calling for a 30-cent boost, plus a health insurance plan, an adequate pension plan, increased vacation pay, and adjustment of many important wage inequalities and classification!
Although at first glance this seems to be far more than the GM workers’ conference approved as its demands, Walter P. Reuther, UAW-CIO president, told the Chrysler conference that it was actually less, for the adjustments in wage inequalities in GM plants which shall be demanded bring the GM demands to MORE than a total of 40 cents an hour.
Reuther did not demand that the Chrysler workers follow the GM pattern, but rather spoke in explanation of why the GM demands were really higher than the Chrysler demands!
As a matter of fact, the whole question of demands on the corporation has been inflated into a factional issue in which everyone is determined not to be shown any less militant than the next person.
In local union discussions before the Chrysler conference, this was evident in the speeches of many well-known “politicians” in the UAW. In one local union, for example, a resolution was introduced for a 25-cent increase, plus five cents for a medical plan. Before the discussion was over, a pension plan and other points were added to the resolution.
This is a good technique for avoiding the real issues, in our opinion. The ideas of a wage increase without a price increase and a cost of living bonus through an escalator clause were largely lost in the speech-making in which the “politicians” sought to show they weren’t going to be put on the spot by asking what seemed like less than the previous speaker.
Even such conservatives as Norman Mathews, UAW director of the Chrysler department, went along with this approach to the problem rather than lose “face.”
Of course, everyone in the UAW knows that this kind of factional approach is due primarily to the attempt of the Stalinists to regain ground in the auto union by suddenly appearing as “militant” through outbidding and outspeaking anyone, especially Reuther, in anything he says or asks of the corporations.
The problem of unified strategy received more attention at local union meetings than at the conference, which did, of course, pass a resolution calling for unified strategy to a joint Chrysler-GM committee.
In local unions the idea of a unified CIO strategy to prevent the steel union, or the UE-CIO, from setting a poor pattern as they did during the1945–46 General Motors strike (higher wages with higher prices) was discussed more fully. This type of fruitful discussion in which basic ideas of a wage struggle policy are presented, wasn’t to the liking of many of the new “militants,” who want to avoid an analysis of the past fights and the fruitful lessons for the present fight that can be derived from such an analysis.
Since Chrysler is and has been a tough customer in negotiations, there seems little likelihood that any good results will come quickly in negotiations unless its Wall Street owners decide to let this corporation be a “pattern” for all wage negotiations.
In any event, the wage policy committee of the UAW which is unified in its goal will be in a position to handle these kinds of questions without any friction between the Chrysler and GM departments.
A far more important aspect of this “pattern question” is what the UE does and what the steel workers do. Unity in the CIO in its objectives and in the contracts signed, so that no union is sold short as the GM workers were in 1946, is a key question in this respect.
Likewise, the futility of higher wages with price increases has become so obvious that no one dares any longer in most UAW locals to ridicule the idea of higher wages without price increases – a demand raised in the last GM strike.
 



DETROIT, Feb. 1 – In an effort to hasten negotiations with the auto corporations on wage demands, the UAW-CIO leadership advanced the meeting time of the scheduled Chrysler union delegate conference to February 14 and 15. This will enable the UAW-CIO to immediately open wage discussions with Chrysler, and test the reaction of the auto industry to the third round of wage demands since the war. The idea of the UAW-CIO leadership is to see if Chrysler may be a “soft spot,” among the big three, before taking on General Motors in the decisive struggle.
At the Chrysler conference, the delegates will be presented two alternate propositions. Norman Mathews, Chrysler department director, has been reported to be recommending the straight 25 cents wage increase,and 5 cents for medical care. Walter P. Reuther, UAW-CIO president, might ask the Chrysler delegates to adopt a program similar to that of the recent General Motors conference, which included 15 cents straight increase, 10 cents per hour for a pension plan, and 5 cents for hospitalization and medical care.
Unfortunately, the Chrysler delegates will be unable, under the contract in effect now, to take up the vital question of eliminating section 6 of the contract, known as “company security.” Also Section 2, under which management reserves the full right to determine all production. These sections have jeopardized the standing and work of the union stewards. However, many burning wage inequalities and classifications are subject to change, and the delegates are expected to devote considerable attention to these problems.
 
Reuther Heads Talks
The importance of the move against Chrysler is emphasized by the fact that Reuther is going to head the union negotiators. Meanwhile, at General Motors the corporation has shown that its arrogant and autocratic attitude towards the UAW-CIO hasn’t change one bit. The corporation tried to force its own insurance plan down the throats of the GM workers without even attempting to bargain with the union, as the supplemental agreement of 1947 calls for. As a result, the UAW-CIO was able to get the NLRB to force the corporation to stop this flagrant violation of collective bargaining procedure by a temporary court order restraining GM.
Another indication of GM’s attitude is the recent demand of C.E. Wilson, GM president, for a 45-hour week in the auto industry. Likewise, GM officials have declared they are going to ask for other concessions from the union! Union delegates from General Motors shops will meet again on February 24 to talk over the entire contract with GM which expires on April 28.
 

  DETROIT, May 24 – The wage struggle of the UAW-CIO reached a decisive stage this week, when GM offered a six to 10 cents an hour wage increase, and Chrysler corporation began negotiations again with the union. The threat of a strike at GM lost a little of its potency when five GM locals, including the big Buick Local 599 voted against strike action at special meetings Sunday. The only explanation for the action of the Buick Local leadership is that they were engaged in factional sniping at the Reuther leadership. Emil Mazey, acting president of the UAW-CIO, went to the Local 599 meeting Sunday and personally delivered a strong plea for a strike vote. This local, with 15,000 members, is a key union in Flint. Certainly, the rank and file at the meeting had every right in the world to be concerned with the sacrifices entailed in another strike. However, the union leadership had the responsibility of supporting Mazey’s plea for strike action. It is ironical that some of the people who have been talking mighty big talk about a general strike in the auto industry did not throw their support for a strike vote in Buick Local 599!  Chrysler Situation The GM situation is most important for any pattern set in GM would probably be followed by Chrysler. The solid mass picket lines at Chrysler have shown that corporation that the workers are determined to win a real victory. The reaction of the UAW-CIO to a company plan to use foremen for inventory work in the shops also demonstrated how serious the union is in this fight. When reports reached the UAW-CIO that foremen were going to take inventory, the UAW-CIO leadership immediately branded this as strike-breaking, and warned the corporation of the consequences. The foremen’s union also took a strong stand against doing this kind of work. If Chrysler tries to go through with their plan, serious trouble may result, for the UAW-CIO is determined to smash any strike-breaking. In a leaflet to all foremen, the UAW-CIO said as much. Chrysler and the UAW-CIO agreed to meet on Wednesday May 25 fora resumption of wage talks, after Governor Sigler called both parties into a secret session last Sunday night in Detroit. By his repeated threats “to maintain law and order” at any cost, Governor Sigler is trying to intimidate union leaders, for there is no violence. Only the company has tried to provoke it, and if Chrysler succeeds in provoking trouble, Sigler,who is their man, has announced he’ll help the companies by “maintaining law and order,” which means,in plain language, to protect any strike-breakers. An example of the kind of argument used at Flint against a GM strike vote was that of Roger Townsend, recording secretary of Local 599. “If Buick guys could walk the picket line 113 days in 1946, the Chrysler workers can walk for two months.” Whether or not anybody at anytime walked any picket line for any amount of time to win a strike struggle, Chrysler workers can, and are ready, if necessary, to walk for more than two months to defend their union, and get a wage increase. That is not the problem. Chrysler workers alone, no matter how militant, cannot defeat Wall Street single-handed. It would take even more than the whole UAW-CIO to defeat Wall Street. It would take the backing of the entire labor movement. In spite of the additional difficulties created by the refusal of five GM locals to approve a strike, the UAW-CIO leadership is trying to get a decent wage settlement. This week is decisive for the outcome of the fight of the UAW-CIO against the auto industry.   
  DETROIT, Mich., May 1 – Unless Chrysler corporation makes a satisfactory wage concession by May 12, the 75,000 workers employed in its various plants will be called out, it was announced by the policy committee of the United Automobile Workers-CIO, headed by Emil Mazey, acting president of the union. Setting of a strike date was in sharp contrast to the action of Philip Murray, CIO president, who capitulated to the steel corporations’ refusal to give any wage concessions to the steel workers. It is a reflection of the difference between the UAW-CIO, a union with a militant, democratic tradition, in which the leadership is more responsive to the needs of the rank and file, and the bureaucratically dominated United Steel Workers of America. As a preliminary to the strike announcement, the UAW-CIO published large advertisements in the Detroit newspapers showing that Chrysler could easily pay the union demands of 30 cents an hour, reduce the price of its cars $145 a model, and still make between six to eight per cent profit on its investment. These advertisements were clipped and used extensively in the shops, giving the rank and file a clearer idea of the issues involved in the wage demands. Also, some hard-hitting leaflets entitled, The Six Cent Insult, were distributed. These exposed the corporation’s wage policies, and quoted from the arrogant speeches of management during negotiations. They also showed that management had given itself extensive wage increases in 1947. Although the announced lay-offs of Plymouth workers due ostensibly to steel shortages, the pressure of the cost of living, the poor financial state of most workers tended to give the workers a mood of uncertainty, it was noticeable that a tightening up of ranks, and the beginning of a strike sentiment was developing. The truth of the matter is that, although no one wants a strike, the refusal of Chrysler to grant an obviously indicated wage increase, is putting the workers into a fighting mood. The fact that more and more brief shutdowns are occurring in various shops reflects the growing tensions and restlessness of the autoworkers, squeezed between the inflationary cost of living, and the drive of management for more production, that is, the speed-up. The first major strike should occur at Chrysler, unless the union’s wage demands are settled satisfactorily.   
  DETROIT – Chrysler corporation got its first surprise last week when the UAW-CIO brushed aside the farce of negotiations which the company was trying to get away with, and announced a break-off in talks with the corporation until it got down to business. Instead of wasting its time listening to the insults poured on the union negotiators by Chrysler officials, the union leadership went to the rank and file with an explanation of the basic issues and why a strike showdown seemed inevitable. Of course, the rank and file responded to the situation. Confusion, uncertainty and worry began to give way to determination. In the shops a change in sentiment was noticeable and serious strike preparations begun.  Explain Company Talk At many local meetings, UAW leaders explained why members were being called upon again to make the sacrifices necessary in a strike struggle. In essence, the UAW said: “Chrysler corporation believes that the workers are so demoralized, dumb and willing to work under present conditions, that the union can’t get their backing. Only the union leadership is agitating for a wage increase. The men in the shops are afraid a wage increase means higher prices, so they don’t want it. The union might be able to force the men out on strike but can’t keep them out very long. If the union wants to do something for the men, it would cut union dues, and give the men $1.50 a month more in wages. Only the dumb clucks can’t get along on the wages we pay. “Pension plan? What the hell do you think we are running? A charity institution? Profits? Sure, we made a lot. Next year we intend to double them. It is none of your business. That’s what we are in business for. To make profits!” When the men in the shops hear of the attitude Chrysler has taken during negotiations, they respond with anger. At various local meetings you can see the difference in reaction between the start and the end of the speeches. No one is “rabble-rousing” the workers. The facts speak plainly for themselves. There is no choice but to fight back. And the workers see it. The fact that the UAW-CIO has announced its strike deadline, and is not letting anything detract from it, also has its effect. On May 12, the plants go down, unless Chrysler comes across.  Ignore State Board One element of uncertainty was removed from the situation when the union ignored the lay-offs at Chrysler this past Friday and Monday. As a matter of fact, everyone in the shops recognized that these lay-offs were phony, that steel was available and that the corporation was merely trying to weaken the workers financially before the strike began. This move of the corporation boomeranged, for it merely exposed Chrysler. Another confusing angle was cleared up by the union when it bluntly told the Michigan State Mediation officials that it intended to ignore those petty politicians and their attempt to apply the Bonine-Tripp law against the Chrysler workers. Phillip Weiss, State Mediation Board chairman, announced the Chrysler strike would have to be postponed until a secret vote among employees was taken. The daily press here screamed in its headlines, “Chrysler Strike Postponed.” Only, they forgot to ask the union. Speaking for the international executive board, Emil Mazey, acting president, announced that the UAW-CIO challenged the right of the state board to intervene since the law didn’t apply to a nationwide strike,and that the UAW-CIO was going ahead as per schedule. It had taken its own strike vote, and it had announced its intentions under the Taft-Hartley 60 day notice clause. When the state officials mentioned court action, fines and imprisonment, the UAW leadership attitude was that they’d have to take their chances. After all, even if the Bonine Tripp law were found to be constitutional, the maximum penalty is six months in jail and a thousand dollars fine! And in any strike settlement, dismissal of court action against the union is likely to be one of the first things agreed upon. The whole point of this intervention by the corporation-minded politicians is to build up a barrage of anti-union propaganda by saying the strike is “illegal.”  General Significance Besides explaining the corporation’s attitude, and showing that the union means business, the union leadership has also done a pretty fair job of indicating the significance of the Chrysler strike to all organized labor. Again, a summary of the kind of speeches made would be along these lines: “Wall Street bankers, who own Chrysler, are determined to crush labor. They are trying it in the packinghouse strike; they refused the steel workers a raise and they are turning thumbs down on our demands. The reason is that they think they have us on the run. They want to see how far they can go. Our job is to stop them. Our victory would set a pattern for other unions to follow. Wall Street wants to go back to the pre-CIO days. They want to destroy the unions eventually. This is the first test.” On the economic issue involved, the union leaders keep explaining how the corporation could pay higher wages without price increases. In fact they could lower prices and still make a profit.  Aid from Local 212 Unfortunately, the organization and leadership in some local unions in the Chrysler set-up are not up to par, in comparison, for example, with an outstanding local union, like 7, which has put on a real campaign among the rank and file, and where a real solid spirit exists. Some local unions are far behind in having division meetings. At Dodge Local 3, the Stalinists tried to get a resolution through postponing the strike. Two of the out of town local unions in the Chrysler set-up need bolstering. But all these things are known, and steps are being taken to remedy any weaknesses. All strikes develop in uneven tempo. The militants inspire the conservatives. The strong aid the weak. This strike will be no different. The Chrysler Locals in the Detroit area are going to obtain some first rate assistance from the militant Briggs Local 212, whose thousands of members will be unemployed due to the Chrysler shutdown, but who will get their unemployment compensation because they are not directly involved in the strike! Ken Morris, Local 212 president, already has announced plans for picket lines and other forms of assistance to the Chrysler workers. Certainly, with the reactionary atmosphere prevailing even in Detroit, the UAW is going to find some tough obstacles ahead in the Chrysler strike. Police Commissioner Toy hasn’t yet tried out his notorious “riot squads.” The Congressional committees in Washington are known to be watching for a chance to come into the strike and make anti-union propaganda. A real fight is looming.   
  DETROIT, April 25 — The attempted assassination of Walter P. Reuther, United Automobile Workers-CIO president, on Tuesday night, April 20, was more than a repugnant and cowardly act of violence against an individual respected and admired by thousands of workers. It was more than a shock and a personal misfortune. It was a political event of important consequence to the entire labor movement. No one recognized this quicker than Walter Reuther himself. Although badly wounded, and in danger of losing his life, Reuther tried to catch a glimpse of his potential murderer, and his first words were,“It could have been Communists, management or fascists.” Shortly after doctors gave him emergency care, Reuther amplified his comments in a statement to Prosecutor James N. McNally. “I would say there are three possibilities, and I don’t know which to put in first place. “There is the question of Communism which I have fought through the years, and they have told me they consider me their No. 1 enemy.” “There are the fascists, cranks, who are just as extreme the other way, and the third possibility, there is still perhaps industry, people in industry who don’t want to accept the fact our unions are here to stay, and some management like that might have reverted back to the kind of tactics they tried eight and ten years ago.” By way of further explanation Reuther said: “As far as I know in the early days in the union, management hired people to try to bump me off. In the early days that happened.”  Important Questions Prosecutor McNally asked, “What about this fight you have been having with 600 Local at Fords.” Reuther replied, “There is nothing of that in this thing. The Local faction you mean out there?” McNally said, “Yes.” Again Reuther said, “I'd say categorically that is not remotely associated with this.” One other important political statement was made in connection with the murder attempt. Victor Reuther, UAW-CIO educational director, brought out the question of the Russian GPU, by pointing out, “After all, if Stalin could send an agent to Mexico to kill Trotsky.” What is important in this for the labor movement to recognize is that any of three major enemies of unionism might have tried to kill Reuther, and that Reuther firmly believes this. That raises two important questions. Finding the perpetrator of this particular anti-union act of violence and second, defeating these enemies of labor so that no possibility exists for them in the future to try murdering union leaders whom they consider effective.  Anti-Labor Field Day Nothing could be more ironical than the fact that the investigation into the murder attempt is in the hands of Detroit’s most vocal labor-hater, Harry S. Toy, police commissioner, who only recently called for lawless action against the Henry Wallace movement! Is it a wonder that a witch-hunt hysteria was whipped up by him in statements to the press. Toy’s first order, which was rescinded, was around-up of all known anti-Reutherites and Stalinists! Detroit’s anti-labor daily newspapers had a field day at the expense of the union movement. The Free Press had an editorial blaming “union politics,” the Hearst Times blew the Communist angle into a gigantic red plot, and the News did a murderous job in its headlines and stories. The conclusion became inescapable that Toy was more interestedi n capturing headlines than a serious investigation of all THREE possibilities. Stalinist leaders in Ford 600 were questioned. An anti-Reutherite in Flint was questioned. George Addes was questioned ... all of which might have been done quietly, without a fuss, as a matter of routine checking, just like Reuther’s associates were questioned for clues. But the newspapers were determined, along with the police, to place the blame for the assassination attempt on the union movement. On Friday, April 23, Toy announced he was asking for permission to examine the minutes of the international executive board meeting held Tuesday, for clues! Every attempt is being made to smear the labor movement with the crime! In the plants, the shock and anger was so great that the IEB issued through Emil Mazey, a statement urging calm, and asking the ranks not to take it out on any political groups, a very responsible attitude as against the hysterical statements of some Reuther followers who kept saying, “The Commies did it,” in an effort to create a lynch spirit against the Stalinists. What is puzzling about the CP angle, or to be more precise, the possibility of the hand of the GPU, is the fact that the FBI has not been called into the case, and surely if there were a remote possibility of such an angle, J. Edgar Hoover would be here in person, making the headlines. As for the equal possibility, to use Reuther’s phrase, that management might be behind the murder attempt, the city police have completely ignored it, although they know, for example, that in 1938 a Ford Service cop and a gangster tried to do a job on Reuther at his home. (These two men were acquitted, incidentally, by a hung jury, after pleading that Reuther had paid them $100 to do a job on himself for publicity.) What about the fascist organizations supported by management over the years in Detroit? What about the old tie-ups between racketeer elements and managements in the past? Only recently Malcom Bingay, Detroit Free Press columnist, had an explanation, or more exactly, an apology for Henry Ford’s keeping gangsters on Harry Bennett’s “service department” payroll. Outside of a mention in one newspaper that the police were checking on “suspects” in the old Briggs beating cases (Ken Morris, Genora J. Dollinger were two of the victims), this angle has been largely ignored. What about the Ku Klux Klan, the Black Legion, the Gerald L.K. Smith fascists, the race-haters who provoked the race riots in 1943, who were behind the Sojourner Truth housing violence? All these are violent enemies of Reuther. Only recently Reuther’s blast at Jim-Crowism in the American Bowling Congress provoked a bitter personal hatred against him by Jim Crow elements in the shops and in the city. Seldom was Reuther denounced as venomously as that week. Are those elements, who make up the lynchers in the South, incapable of trying violence. In 1943, 34 persons were killed and over 1,000 injured because these people provoked a terrible race riot. The political climate for violence against Reuther, who symbolizes everything these fascists hate, exists in Detroit. Likewise, Reuther’s regime has made it much more difficult for numbers and bookie elements in the shops to function. All of these angles deserve the kind of investigation Reuther outlined in his comments on the assassination attempt. But a Jim Crow police department and a labor-hating police commissioner are hardly the persons to look under those conditions. We must mention in passing the growing anti-Semitism, which is directed considerably at Reuther, and upon which the fascist scum breed. Whispering campaigns circulate through the shops about Reuther as a “Jew,” his wife a “Jew,” and Reuther having too many Jews on the staff. (In the pre-convention fight a leaflet with this line was circulated in the shops.) The reward which the UAW-CIO and its locals offered, amounting to over $126,000 indicates how seriously the unionists take this matter, and how much they are concerned with finding the murderous gang behind this deed. But no matter which of the three possibilities becomes a reality, if the killer is found, the social conditions for the hatreds, and tensions remain. Until these are removed their exists always danger to union leaders, and to the union movement.   
  Wall Street might well be said to be operating under a new slogan, “Two down and one to go,” for its government in Washington broke the coal strike and the threatened railroad strike by means of governmental injunctions. The “one to go” is the UAW-CIO, America’s most aggressive and democratic union, with an excellent tradition of spearheading the labor movement ever since its great sit-down strikes built the CIO in 1936 and 1937. Wall Street made a fool out of Philip Murray, CIO president. The steelworkers got nothing in their negotiations and Murray capitulated, fearful of taking on the vast struggle indicated by the events. John L. Lewis bowed before a governmental injunction. So did the railroad unions, cursed with craft unionism and a hide-bound leadership. And the Stalinist-dominated UE-CIO silently retreats in its previous demands for wage increases to meet the inflationary cost of living. One CIO union, the Packinghouse workers’, finds itself in a life and death struggle. These events raise important questions for the entire union movement. Does the American labor movement continue to retreat under the blows of Wall Street and its Washington administration? Does the American working class continue to bear the brunt of inflation and the high taxes for government expenditures in war preparation? When does the retreat turn into a counter-offensive? Within the framework of this increasing triumph of reaction, in which the labor movement retreats and retreats, one major CIO union has just begun to fight. It is the UAW-CIO.  GM Is Next The UAW-CIO leadership and ranks could not, by their whole history, just go along with the wage freeze policy that has been imposed on the Steelworkers. The UAW-CIO could not be intimidated by the retreats and defeats elsewhere. When Chrysler Corporation tried to follow the steel pattern and said “No” to all UAW-CIO demands, the workers responded readily to the union’s call for strike action. But this is just the beginning of the struggle. Chrysler Corporation provoked the walkout. It turned down all union demands, because its Wall Street owners want to test the UAW-CIO to see if it can be weakened or destroyed during the course of the strike struggle. General Motors is next. GM has taken the same adamant attitude toward the union as Chrysler. Among the rank and file GM workers the response is already indicated by the strike votes that are now being completed. The UAW-CIO leadership expects a hard fight in GM, according to Emil Mazey, acting president of the union, in his speech to the Chrysler delegate conference Tuesday night May 11. On Sunday, May 16, the Ford Motor Company added its weight to the Wall Street campaign. In reply to union demands for wage increases and other concessions, the Ford Motor Company insolently proposed wage cuts and the introduction of piecework. The spectacle of a billion dollar corporation making millions of dollars in a period of inflation and demanding that the union permit a cut in. wages is something that should give every union man and woman pause for thinking. Such arrogance on the part of the corporation can be explained only as Ford’s way of informing the world that this giant corporation will do its part in Wall Street’s anti-labor campaign. The insulting character of the Ford corporation’s proposals is emphasized by the fact that this corporation claims it wants to lower wages so it can give “the public a break,” when every ten-year-old child knows that Ford just raised its prices on all 1949 models by hundreds of dollars.  War Against Labor The united front of Chrysler, GM and Ford should serve as a warning to all UAW-CIO members. It signifies that the auto barons are united in their determination to defeat the UAW-CIO. Victory over the UAW-CIO would be decisive one over the entire labor movement precisely because of the militant tradition of this great industrial union. All these events testify to the fundamental fact that Wall Street is fighting a class war against labor. Wall Street is class conscious. The capitalists know what they want. They are united. The next main battlefield is the auto industry, and this is the challenge before the UAW-CIO and the whole labor movement. Study these excerpts from a letter sent to all employers by Earl Bunting, chairman of the National Association of Manufacturers. Read them and reread them. For they indicate the kind of struggle ahead: “These Socialistic windbags and Leftwingers of the labor unions are obsessed with a bitter hatred of private business. They care nothing about the fact that salaries and wages do not depend on arbitrary decision. They care nothing about the fact that the consumer is the lifeblood of business. They care nothing if your business is doomed – if its operation brings losses only. What these spellbinders do want is to strike down property rights to the level of Socialism ... “So I say, let’s turn on the heat and go to bat, let’s defend your rights and miner-rights to make a profit – rights to manage our own business. Let us go all out in these crucial months ahead with the utmost expenditures of energy and manpower and purpose, before the public, showing up those who would destroy our free economy in their true blood red color ...” In event some union member does not know whom the NAM means by “Socialistic windbags,” we must remind you that it is the Reuther leadership of the UAW-CIO. The Wall Street campaign against labor is easy to see and its mode of operation is crystal clear, it expects and will get full support from its government in Washington. It has the newspapers, the radio and other means of propaganda to use against the workers.  Hurt by Disunity What about the labor movement? It is a tragic fact that labor has seldom been as divided as it is today. Not only are the CIO and AFL and the railroad brotherhoods separate organizations, and that is bad enough. The fact of the matter is that even the CIO is not united. Philip Murray and the steelworkers union let down the UAW-CIO. The Stalinist-dominated UE-CIO leadership is hardly on speaking terms with other CIO leaders. The most elementary strike strategy demands unity of forces and purpose. The UAW-CIO by itself cannot whip Wall Street, although it did and will put up a terrific struggle. Against a united capitalist class there must be a united labor movement. Extending the strike of the Chrysler workers will not answer the question. It will serve primarily to throw the additional forces of the UAW-CIO into the struggle. But what is a far greater need is that the entire CIO throw its resources into this struggle. The coalminers had a nationwide strike but a government injunction stopped it. The railroad workers threatened a nationwide strike. The government injunction stopped it. The UAW-CIO can and might in the course of a period of time find itself in a general strike. This just begins the struggle. It does not end it. Only the unity of the entire labor movement behind the struggle assures victory for the UAW-CIO and the union movement as a whole. To outline the coming struggles and the problems involved indicates what progressive unions throughout the nation must demand and fight for. Strike struggles, especially when they concern a powerful union like the UAW-CIO, cannot be lost on the picket lines. They are lost in conferences in Washington and in courtrooms or by the failure of the union movement to stand solidly behind a great strike struggle. Neither John L. Lewis by himself nor Walter Reuther nor Philip Murray nor any other leader can hope in this period to defeat the united Wall Street even in an elementary economic struggle. United action, UNITED STRATEGY and a recognition that this is a class struggle in which either Wall Street or labor will triumph are indispensable prerequisites to victory. In the final analysis, this is the responsibility of the ranks – of everyone of us in the shops. We must DEMAND the immediate convocation of local and national inter-union conferences at which our actions can be combined, our joint strategy planned. We must raise this DEMAND at every local meeting!   
  DETROIT, May 25 – The snake dances, the excitement and the grins on the large Chrysler picket lines today after the announcement of an eleven cent an hour wage boost in the GM settlement were a good indication that such an agreement would be overwhelmingly approved as satisfactory, under the circumstances. This reaction is sound, considering the terrible difficulties that faced the United Automobile Workers-CIO in its wage struggle. Not only did CIO President Phil Murray settle for nothing in his wage negotiations with the steel industry, but at no time did he make a public endorsement and pledge of support of the UAW-CIO wage fight! The retreat in packinghouse, and elsewhere, also tended to isolate the UAW-CIO. Above all, there was no common goal, no unified strategy and genuine solidarity among the CIO unions to back the UAW-CIO. In addition, the UAW-CIO negotiators went into last minute conferences with GM with the knowledge – and the company made the most of it – that key unions in the GM set-up voted against strike action. Besides the big Buick Local 599 in Flint, the key tool and die local 23 voted against strike! However, the whole militant tradition of the UAW-CIO was sufficiently strong – and the picket lines at Chrysler were indisputable testimony to the fact that Wall Street was in for a real fight, if they refused any wage concessions, no matter what the overall situation of the American labor movement might be. Although an eleven cent wage increase, with a modified escalator clause, hardly meets the problems of the inflationary cost of living, the wage settlement in the auto industry is a real tribute to the kind of unionism the UAW-CIO stands for, and it does mark the first time that Wall Street’s current anti-labor offensive was met, and that a major union in America did not retreat! UAW-CIO negotiators expect a similar pattern in negotiations with Chrysler that began Wednesday. The crack in the “no wage increase” policy of Wall Street is wide open, and the UAW-CIO expects to improve wage clauses in most of its contracts.  Contract Provisions What does the GM agreement call for? It must be remembered, incidentally, that the entire GM contract was up for renegotiation, and that most of it has been extended for another two year period. GM workers are obtaining an 8 cents cost of living boost, plus a flat 3 cents “basic wage increase” for a cash total of 11 cents an hour. One year from now the GM workers obtain another “basic wage increase” of 3 cents an hour. The modified escalator clause in the new GM contract operates in this fashion. There will be quarterly adjustments for the cost of living factor, based on the official Bureau of Labor Statistics figures, provided there is a change, either way, of 1.14 points in the index reflecting living costs. In no case, however, can there be a reduction in the immediate cost of living increase below five cents an hour, for the first year. In other words, if there is a real price reduction, the UAW-CIO limits any wage reduction it would take in the next year to 5 cents an hour. If prices continue to rise, wage adjustments upwards will follow each quarter, according to how the price increases affect the cost of living, as determined by the government statistics.  No Union Shop The UAW-CIO agreed to withdraw its petitions for elections to the NLRB for a union shop in GM plants. It retained its voluntary dues check-off system, and a “union security clause” which we have not yet been able to obtain and study. Although ambiguous language covers the status of the pension plan and medical insurance plan demands of the UAW-CIO, it is very probable that these have been either dropped or postponed for a long time. There has been no mention of a “company security” clause in the new contract, but neither has there been any mention of adjustment of other clauses such as the limited time committeemen have for bargaining. A report on all these questions will be made at the conference of GM delegates this Friday to ratify the new contract. Of course, discussion in the UAW-CIO over the new GM contract, and any Chrysler settlement will take on, at least partly, a factional character,as the anti-Reuther forces will try to find a way to capitalize on these events. It is very unlikely that any such “capital” exists. Contrary to the expectations of the anti-Reuther forces, the UAW-CIO leadership did obtain a satisfactory agreement. Drawing the important political lessons from the present wage struggle will not be helped by the factional contributions of the Stalinists and their allies. Quite the contrary. They will only serve to obscure the basic issues involved. Next week we shall report more fully on this aspect of the situation.   


DETROIT – The walkout at Chrysler involving nearly 14,000 workers last week was especially significant because it marks a beginning of a return to a mood of confident aggressiveness on the part of the ranks, due, of course, to their interpretation of the results of the national elections.
Many speed-up issues have been pressing workers at Chrysler and other plants, but the confusion, demoralization and feeling of isolation that oppressed the union movement prevented any direct action. Griping and. bitterness have been very marked, but there was no evidence of any serious self-confidence and militancy.
However, an explosion was inevitable after the election, for the results were taken as a shift back to the “good old days.” No matter what explanations or rationalizations are offered by the daily press, the men in the shops feel strongly that they, and they alone, were responsible for Truman’s victory. The despair and confusion among editorial writers and radio commentators simply added to the workers’ feeling of confidence.
Last spring, when it was necessary to call a strike at Chrysler for wage demands, the ranks had to be dragged into the struggle. It took a lot of hard work to convince the workers they should strike.
Last week, when the chief stewards went around informing the men that a special union meeting was going to be held at 9:00 a.m. and everybody should walk out to attend, the response was excellent. Spirit at, the union meetings was high. Determination to win was expressed by everyone. The Local 7 Union leadership took a firm position in support of the walkout, in spite of the inevitable pressure for an immediate return to work. Everyone was convinced a demonstration against speed-up was necessary, no matter what the immediate result. For the Chrysler Corporation would think twice before it tried something again, if it saw how quickly the ranks would respond to a call for direct action.
Only among some Negro workers was there a hesitancy to walk out and that was based understandably on their reaction to a rumor that the walkout in the Kercheval plant of Chrysler was in protest of a Negro being broken in on the assembly line, since one of the men whom the assemblers would not break in was a Negro. But the fact is that the union always insisted that utility and relief men, who are paid higher rates to break in new men, should do the job. On the day shift no Negroes were involved. What happened, of course, was that the usual set of petty politicians figured they might get a few Negro votes by spreading a whispering campaign against the walkout, even though it meant playing the corporation’s game of dividing the workers on racial lines.
Fortunately, the hulk of active white and Negro unionists attacked this rumor and put things on a sound union basis where it belonged. Of course, there remains widespread discrimination against Negroes in the shop. The UAW knows this as well as the next man, and it has tried to show why it is basically the corporation’s fault. Of course, the hundreds of new Southern white workers hired into the shops are strongly anti-Negro, and many union leaders don’t tackle this problem seriously enough.
But this walkout was not over that problem. The issue was the speed-up in the machine shop and in the trim division.
Most of the union activists understood that Chrysler wouldn’t settle the issue completely while the men were out, for that would set a precedent that would give the union a real incentive to call a series of “quickies.” So the inevitable compromise was worked out, and it remains to be seen what happened in the shop. The crankshaft men are supposed to do a “decent day’s work,” instead of the jump from 480 to 600 crankshafts a day, as demanded by the company. In Kercheval, the men fired for refusing to break in new men are expected to get back. But that remains to be seen.
This walkout is not the end of the problem. It is just a sign of the days ahead. For the changeover to 1949 model will bring the usual company maneuvers to speed up all work. The big fights are still ahead.
 



An important if not decisive aspect of the problem of any veterans’ organization has been and remains its attitude toward, and its relations with, the labor movement.
Not the least of the reasons why the ambitious plans of the Brass Hats of the American Legion to recruit millions of World War II vets failed was the bitter opposition of the labor movement to the reactionary policies and role of the American Legion in American society.
Any organization which is stained with a reputation of “strike-breaking” is hardly likely to find much support in a social atmosphere where 15,000,000 union members work and live.
It was the persistent and really devastating criticism of the American Legion by the labor movement that did a job on the Legion. It remains a parasitic pressure agency, controlled by vested interests whose limitations as a social force fortunately are understood by millions.
The Veterans of Foreign Wars apparently understood this lesson, for early in the war the powers that be of this organization, made a friendly “working agreement” with organized labor and on some issues found itself united with labor on social legislation issues (housing, for example).
 
Close Ties Essential
Among the newly born veterans’ organizations of World War II, the American Veterans Committee certainly got off on the right foot, insofar as the question of relations with the labor movement was concerned. It at least understood the need for a “sympathetic” attitude toward organized labor.
The impact of events has taught the necessity of some revision in the “sympathetic” attitude. As a matter of fact, It is not being too blunt to say that now the AVC has a future only insofar as it allies itself closely with the vast movement representing the millions of workers in America today.
For the millions of veterans who returned to work, by and large, have become union men. The chief organizational instrument they utilize to take up their problems is the union of which they are a member, and properly so.
 
UAW Veterans Work
Let us take the outstanding example of this tendency, the work of the UAW-CIO veterans department. Since World War II, the UAW-CIO has serviced the 250,000 veterans who are in the auto shops in a manner similar to that of veterans organizations.
There were national policy conferences, persistent lobbying for veterans’ legislation, court cases on seniority questions, a successful series of drives for bonuses. Under the direction of Emil Mazey, the veterans department of the UAW-CIO has out-serviced the older veterans’ organizations. It has sought to convince other CIO unions to follow a similar course.
But the fact remains that sufficient special problems remain which the union movement feels it cannot handle, unless it were to set up its own veterans organizations, rather than veterans committees in local unions, and a department in the international union.
It was inevitable that the union leaders would turn in the direction of the AVC as the organization to handle those problems in this period. The CIO and the AVC saw eye to eye on so many public questions as to dictate alliance.
As usual, the UAW took the lead in bringing home to union members the value and need for an AVC. The international union executive board, the policy making body between national conventions, this last spring urged all local unions to help build labor chapters of the AVC. The national CIO has assisted, and other unions .like the International Lady Garment Workers Unions, also have done much to help AVC.
 
Convention Results
This is the beginning of the possibility of success for AVC. A concerted post-convention organization drive, using all the techniques, some organizers, finances, and other assistance from the union movement offers a real hope of success in building the AVC as a progressive social organization, welding the veterans and unionists into a firmer and more effective social force in America.
Of course, this idea depends on another: the results of the AVC convention. Certainly the union movement hasn’t the slightest interest in building or helping any organization which is just another “transmission belt” for the rule or ruin clique of the Communist Party. But neither can it be aided by an organization which so fails to meet the Stalinist challenge on an effective political and democratic level, that it reduces Itself to impotence and succumbs to dangerous concepts in the process.
Smashing the influence of Stalinism is a MUST for the AVC convention if it is to have any serious future. This, however, must be done properly, and not by indefensible expulsionist means. It’s a safe guess that the delegates from many labor chapters of AVC will not be in the background of this fight, for the union movement needs a powerful, non-Stalinist AVC, and the AVC needs the labor movement.
 



DETROIT – Like every other important CIO Industrial Union Council, the Wayne County body is facing the political and organizational crisis, caused by the split between the Murray and Stalinist forces within the CIO.
The national CIO sent an order to this – and every other CIO Council in America – informing it bluntly that it either go along with an anti-Wallace and pro-Marshall Plan policy or be subject to organizational measures.
This raises two important questions for progressive unionists. What are the probable courses of developments and what is a sound policy to meet this crisis? Although there are variations in the different CIO centers, the fact is that the basic problems are the same.
 
Origin of Crisis
The origin of this crisis is known to every CIO unionist. Under the pressure of the American ruling class,the Murray leadership in the CIO has taken an increasingly servile position behind the imperialist plans of American capitalism. Under the dictates of needs of Moscow’s rulers, the American Stalinist party has taken a position of complete opposition to those policies advocated by Murray. Thus the contending groups within the CIO desire to control the labor movement in behalf of their masters, be they in Washington or Moscow.
Each faction in the CIO covers up its real rule by high sounding phrases, and demagogic arguments. The Stalinists claim they are for a pro-peace policy, that they support Henry Wallace because he is a peace candidate, and an anti-imperialist candidate, and that they oppose the Marshall plan because it is imperialist.
The Murray forces denounce Stalinist imperialism, expose Wallace as a stooge of the Stalinists, and support the Marshall plan, claiming that it isn’t imperialist, but will help European recovery. Unable, at least for the present, to support Harry Truman openly, the top CIO leadership does it indirectly. Its hypocrisy in this matter fools few workers.
The triumph of either Wall Street’s policies or Moscow’s policies in the CIO dooms the labor movement. It serves only to put the workers in the camp of one of the major contending imperialist powers as a prerequisite for World War III. That is why the workers must defeat both policies, or else suffer the consequences of another war, this time of an atomic character.
How utterly defenseless either the Murray or Stalinist policies are for the labor movement is shown in the debate that takes place in CIO circles over these fundamental differences of opinion.
When a Stalinist gets up, as he did at the Wayne County CIO Council, and exposes the Murray policies, the Murray forces cannot answer effectively. They avoid a discussion of Truman, of Wall Street imperialism. We have yet to hear one of them say a good word for Truman.
In return, when a shrewd Murray man denounces the Stalinist rule in the Eastern European countries, the totalitarianism of Russia and its grabs for power, the Stalinists can only shriek hysterically, and yell, “red-baiter,” “stooge of the NAM,” etc.
 
Bedlam in Council
This is the sort of background that prevails in the present crisis within the CIO. The Wayne County council had before it for consideration the letter from John Brophy, saying you must go along or else ...
What to do? The Wayne County council, controlled lock, stock and barrel by the Stalinists, tried again to stall. Tracy Doll, council president, and chairman of the meeting, recommended the communication be received as information and filed. Of course, this itself is subject to the interpretation as being a violation of the national CIO mandate.
No sooner was this recommendation made, than bedlam broke loose. One pro-Murray delegate tried to make an amendment to concur with the communication. Doll ruled it out of order. By yelling points of order, and points of information, the Stalinists hoped to avoid any commitment on the CIO communication, and avoid the inevitable clash with Murray.
However, they reckoned without one of Reuther’s better known and shrewder supporters, Al Barbour, of Local 7, UAW-CIO, who recently left the anti-Reuther caucus. Barbour had a resolution for the Marshall plan which he wanted to introduce and debate, as an amendment to the recommendation made by Tracy Doll. The Stalinists screamed and howled against this as being out of order. For over an hour and a half, parliamentary debate held up the meeting.
Of course, Barbour had fun exposing the Stalinists cries of democracy when they wouldn’t even let him read the resolution. Also, his cracks at the “people who yell purge, but fail to concern themselves with the purges in Europe,” dug deeply into the Stalinists. Finally, on an appeal from the chair, Barbour and Doll debated the parliamentary procedure, and although Barbour was obviously in the right, the Stalinist majority,with the vote of SWP supporters, turned down his appeal to read the resolution as an amendment implementing the CIO policy.
Right after this vote, Doll took the floor to denounce the steel workers locals here for blasting the CIO council in the daily newspapers as being too concerned with “Communist causes.”
Again, a verbal free-for-all ensued. The Stalinists pointed out that every action taken by the council officers was approved by the body. Steelworkers representatives asked questions about CIO council finances, and charges and counter charges filled the air for another hour.
 
Stalinists Get Help
One delegate tried to raise the level of discussion by a plea to come to grips with the problem really facing the council. He was Erwin Bauer, of local 306, UAW-CIO. He gave an accurate recital of Murray’s bureaucratic history in top CIO leadership and he urged the delegates to come to grips with the problem of democracy. He mentioned in passing he was against Wallace. Now this speech, concentrating mainly on Murray’s bureaucracy, was applauded by the Stalinists. For they had a new spokesman on their side.
At no point did Bauer or any spokesman for the SWP, whose line is equivalent to Bauer’s, make the slightest criticism of the Stalinists! For example, the bureaucratic structure of the CIO, its control over local councils, was adopted by the CIO with Stalinist support. For this the Stalinists bear joint responsibility with Murray. No mention of this. No mention of the rule or ruin tactics of the Stalinists.
The Stalinists are too discredited around here to make any effective fight for trade union democracy. When one of them hollers “bureaucrat” at Murray it is about as effective and true as Al Capone yelling “murder” at another gangster. Similarly, when the steel worker delegates moan against the Stalinists, it is the height of hypocrisy for these same delegates helped vote the Stalinists into power, despite every possible argument of the Reuther forces against such a course! Remember, in those days Murray preferred the Stalinists to Reuther!
It takes new and fresh voices to defend the Stalinists. And the SWP helped to furnish them here. Instead of fighting for trade union democracy which is alien to both the Murray and Stalinists forces, the SWP acted as attorneys for the Stalinists. This was done by the simple device of not criticizing them in the least, and concentrating exclusively on Murray.
There is nothing unusual in this bloc between the Stalinists and the SWP. Unless the SWP changes its views on the Russian question, a closer alliance is indicated. For both of them stand on the principle that defense of Russia is the key strategic task of the world proletariat. Both are for the “Unconditional Defense of the Soviet Union.”
 
Refer Motion
Barbour kept demanding the floor,and – since most delegates assumed he was speaking for Reuther, whether it was true or not – Nat Ganley, a delegate, and a member of the National Committee of the Stalinist party got up and said:
“Let it be understood that no one is going to get to leave here saying he was deprived of his democratic rights or that we turned down that resolution. You’ll get to read it, Brother Barbour.”
Whereupon – a truly amazing performance – Doll recognized Barbour who read his resolution for the Marshall plan. This provoked another crisis for the Stalinists. If the resolution was voted down, it was a violation of the CIO communication, and an administrator might be sent in by Murray. Naturally the Stalinists could not vote for it. What to do?
At this point, Ernie Mazey, of Briggs 212, came to the rescue with a motion that this resolution be referred either to the next convention of the Wayne County CIO council, or that the executive board be empowered to call a special convention if it felt it necessary. Without discussion, this was passed by the Stalinist majority.
Of course, this subterfuge is hardly likely to deter Murray from administrative action. The National CIO is determined to control these councils, and it has legal authority under the CIO constitution to do so. No matter what maneuvers the Stalinists make, it is unlikely that they will succeed as the industrial unionists were able to in keeping William Green and the AFL bureaucracy from purging the central labor unions of pro-CIO forces in 1936. The weight of the national organization, and the legal “right” of the parent body is too powerful.
 
Intervention of Ranks
What should progressive unionists do? Actually, the motion that Mazey presented has the makings of a good policy. Progressive unionists should call for special conventions of the local bodies, so that the rank and file of the CIO can intervene in this struggle. Instead of the issue of CIO policy being decided by Murray’s bureaucratic methods, and. the Stalinist counter-maneuvers, the rank and file should take up the problem.
Naturally, the Murray forces don’t want rank and file intervention. They prefer the “easy and safe” way, bureaucratic measures. Likewise, the Stalinists fear rank and file participation, because support of their policies is doomed in advance, especially in a place like Detroit, where the Reuther forces are the dominant leadership in the union movement.
We think rank and file participation would be a big advance from every point of view. It would mean involving the men in the shops in deciding their own destiny. It would put both the Murray and Stalinist forces on the spot, for both prefer to fight their battles bureaucratically, rather than take a chance on genuine union democracy with rank and file participation.
Besides a series of local conventions,a special national convention, with hundreds of rank and file delegates to debate political action, would signify progress against the bureaucracy, for both the Stalinists and the Murray forces could be called to account.
This, we believe, should be the approach of progressive unionists in this crisis.
 
Reuther’s Role
In this acute situation; nothing seems less important and serious than the views of Walter Reuther, UAW-CIO president, who is becoming the kind of lost soul he accused Henry Wallace of being. At the recent ADA convention, Reuther was startled when the delegates cheered his blast at both parties, and he made a specific criticism of Truman. At the recent UAW-CIO executive board meeting, a political policy resolution was adopted calling for a new party AFTER the 1948 elections. Such opportunism is so obvious that the resolution might well be preserved as a joke.
The Stalinists ask, “if a Third Party is necessary right after 1948, why not now. Because Reuther doesn’t control it?” The Reuther people are a little hard pressed for answers to the Stalinists.
The fact is – and Reuther knows it – that sentiment against both major parties is powerful in the UAW-CIO, that selling Harry Truman is a mighty difficult if not impossible job, that the only real answer is a labor party. But this means a clash with Murray! And this is what Reuther avoids. As usual he is playing safe.
So we have the phenomenon of the Stalinists trying to capture the anti-capitalist party sentiments, which Reuther himself helped create, and Reuther standing helplessly by, because he lacks a progressive and clear-cut answer.
Murray, and his associates should be able to defeat the Stalinists organizationally. However, the Stalinists will have their revenge. They will defeat Murray’s candidate, Truman, by the Wallace vote. No man knows this better than Reuther. Hence his dilemma.
Against all this, the task of the progressive unionists is clear: for rank and file intervention, for a Labor Party.
 

  DETROIT, April 18 – Negotiations in the auto industry reached a crucial stage this week when the United Automobile Workers-CIO rejected a miserable 6 cent an hour wage increase offer of Chrysler corporation, and General Motors laid off 200,000 workers in an attempt to influence forthcoming NLRB elections on the union shop. An emergency conference of 100 delegates from 14 Chrysler plants on April 17 unanimously turned down the Chrysler corporation offer, and authorized a special five man strategy committee to get strike sanction from the international executive board meeting on Tuesday, April 20. This sanction is the last formality required for the calling of a strike. The UAW-CIO already had filed notice under the Taft-Hartley law, and also the Michigan state Bonine-Tripp Act, for strike action. These notices expired at midnight April 18, and thus the UAW-CIO can call a strike at any time at Chrysler. It is very significant that only when the deadline for strike action neared, and the UAW-CIO made plans for strike machinery did the Chrysler corporation come through with its first serious bargaining. Until April 6, the two months of dilatory talks were marked by complete absence of any serious negotiations by Chrysler. Its spokesmen just listened to the union representatives, and sat tight.  Show High Profits What comes next is partly a matter of speculation, for no one knows exactly what the corporation has in mind. As for the UAW-CIO, it is most unlikely that the union would be satisfied with any such meager offers as the corporation wants to give. Both the corporation and the union leaders will be influenced largely by the reactions in the shops to the six cent offer. The UAW-CIO militants, as shown at the emergency conference on Saturday, are in no mood to let the corporation get away with this contemptuous offer. Their views were confirmed by a report on Chrysler’s probable 1948 earnings as presented by Nathan Weinberg, research director of the UAW-CIO, which showed that the corporation could easily pay the full 30 cents an hour demanded, without a price increase, and still make a huge profit. The corporation has been literally insulting the union negotiators by telling them that the “ability to pay” has nothing to do with the question. The corporation asserts that the men in the shops don’t want a raise! The action of the emergency conference is the first reply to Chrysler. A series of shop meetings is expected this week, for the purpose of solidifying the men in the shops behind the struggle. Unless the corporation comes through with a much better offer, a shutdown of Chrysler is inevitable.  GM Employs Tricks The situation in General Motors reflects the same stubborn anti-union attitude of the auto barons as in Chrysler. GM officials are fighting with every possible means to prevent a genuine election in the plants on the vital question of a union shop. The UAW-CIO has obtained enough signatures to get such an election, but GM wants to include on the rolls all men laid off since 1946, since these persons would be counted, under NLRB rules, as being against the union shop, if they didn’t vote, and obviously persons scattered all over the United States since 1946 would hardly be in a position to vote. In addition, GM refuses to permit the balloting to take place in the shops, as it has on previous occasions involving NLRB elections. These actions brought a vigorous protest by Walter P. Reuther, UAW-CIO president. Fearing that even these technicalities wouldn’t work, GM brought out another trick to work against the union. GM announced the lay-off of 20,000 workers from April 23 to May 3 allegedly because of a steel shortage. No one in the auto industry takes this excuse seriously. Rather, everyone knows that the only reason GM is laying off the workers is to penalize them for showing a union spirit which can bring victory to the UAW-CIO. C.E. Wilson, GM president, in a speech before a business club last week, expressed the attitude of the auto barons toward the UAW-CIO when he said bluntly, “we have some unfinished business in America, more important than aid to Europe.” That business was taking care of the unions!  Showdown Coming At Hudson, Briggs and other companies at which negotiations are beginning or are about to begin, the same adamant anti-union attitude is shown by the auto barons. The UAW-CIO has to get ready for a showdown. Unless Wall Street intervenes for its flunkies in auto management, and Phil Murray, CIO president, makes a deal with the steel companies which sets a pattern, the workers and the bosses in the auto industry are prepared to slug it out again. For the auto barons never learn. They have to be taught the hard way. As is their custom the auto companics are playing it safe all the way around. They have made statements that another price increase in automobiles can be expected. Henry Ford II told reporters this past week that 1949 models would sell for at least five per cent more than 1948 models. Which makes the UAW-CIO demand of higher wages without price increases more important than ever before.   


DETROIT – Auto industry production passed the 5,000,000 mark in cars and trucks for 1947 and brought the fabulous net profit of over $700,000,000 to the Wall Street owners of this giant industry, after all taxes, reserves, etc. were deducted from gross profit.
In sharp contrast, the 900,000 auto and allied industry workers finished 1947 in a desperate – and thus far losing – battle to eke out an existence from their wages, whose real buying power has dropped due to the inflationary trend of prices. This is the basic situation confronting. the recently elected International Executive Board of the UAW as it begins its sessions on wage policy on Janu- [Line of text missing – Note by ETOL]
Everything that Walter Reuther’s economists said would happen in 1947 came to pass. Production did hit the 5,000,000 mark. Profits were fantastic. Wages went to pot because of high prices. A similar economic forecast for 1948 is easy to make, unless the UAW and the rest of the labor movement drastically change their line of thinking and fighting on this problem.
Certainly, fighting for higher wages without price increases would have helped considerably in 1947. If the auto corporations had given 23½ cents an hour wage increase without car price increases, as demanded by Reuther early in 1947, the overall economic picture for the auto workers would be much brighter. The failure of the Reuther forces to drive at all costs for this program, first enunciated in the GM strike in 1945–46 and called the GM Strike Program, has put the UAW into the blind alley now reached on wage policy. The failure of the rest of the CIO and the anti-Reuther forces in the UAW to advance even as far as Reuther’s half-hearted attempts brands that leadership as bankrupt.
How do things stack up for 1948?
In order to foresee 1948, one must remind oneself again that the auto industry could have paid a 50 cent wage increase for 1947 or given a $1,000 cost-of-living Christmas bonus to every worker, and still the auto barons would have made over $100,000,000 profit The failure of the auto workers to get back in wages the wealth they produced put billions of dollars into the hands of the Wall Street owners and speculators and accounted for the pressure toward inflation.
In 1948, a continuation of the economic policies and trends of 1947 simply means an intensification of the process that marked the past year. The Wall Street boys will keep gathering millions of dollars for speculation, profit, and drive prices even higher, while labor will have less and less real purchasing power because it gets back less of what it produces.
Once again, and Reuther’s economists have already spoken out on this point, the idea that wage increases can be given without price increases, becomes pertinent. C.E. Wilson, president of GM, has hinted that car prices will go up another five per cent. The new Hudson already sells for more than the 1947 model.
 
Auto Baron Propaganda
The thinking of the auto barons was expressed perfectly by Wilson, who keeps repeating: “We are selling a $10 product for $7.00.” In other words, car prices are too low. When the auto barons read how new cars sell on used car lots for $1,000 higher than the factory sale price, their profit-crazy minds go completely mad. The $700,000,000 net profit could easily have been over one billion dollars, to their way of thinking, except that Reuther did so much to bring out the connection between wages, prices, profits and production, even if the corporation books were not opened to the public.
Of course, Reuther and his associates will be able to answer easily and effectively the propaganda of the auto barons for higher prices. Any argument that higher prices are required because of wage demands will fall flat simply by showing the profit figures of the big corporations. But winning arguments doesn’t solve a problem. It only shows the way. Even if the UAW does an excellent job against the auto industry in fighting for higher wages without price increases, this can be lost unless the whole CIO adopts a similar viewpoint and struggles unitedly for it. After all, it was Philip Murray, CIO president, who signed a steel contract in 1946 for higher wages with higher prices, and thus broke the back of the GM strike demand for higher wages without price increases.
This blunder of Murray’s must not be repeated in 1948 or the CIO again will suffer a setback similar to that of the past year, in the matter of the fight against the inflationary cost of living. Prices, profits, production as well as wages are as much of labor’s business as management’s, to say the least. Perhaps even Murray has learned something on this score.
Reuther was right as against Murray and other CIO leaders on this question.
Will Wall Street want to take on the CIO in a head-on battle this spring on wages, in view of the international crisis, especially in France and Italy? There are many indications that Wall Street wants to repeat the 1947 wage negotiations: A quick settlement of wage negotiations, without much discussion on wages, prices, profits and production, for the smallest amount possible to sell to the men in the shops. Already some Wall Street spokesmen speak of a ten to fifteen cents an hour wage increase as the figure they think they can get away with.
Certainly a wave of major strikes would hurt the world imperialist plans of Wall Street, and concessions in the 1947 style might be more satisfactory. But labor moves not on the basis of Wall Street’s aims or plans, but on its own needs. A repetition of 1947 wage contracts for labor would be fatal. It would mean more inflation, more profits, a lower standard of living for the auto workers and other working people.
Of course there is a temptation among the CIO bureaucrats to take the easy way put. Repeat in 1948 what was done in 1947 and hope the inevitable doesn’t happen.
The challenge in this situation is directly to the UAW and, above all, to the Reuther leadership which was elected decisively by the ranks precisely because it represented something more and better than the old trade union policies and conservatism. The UAW-CIO is the vanguard of the American labor movement, and its hour of leadership has again arisen.
 



DETROIT, Jan. 18 – Once again General Motors workers prepared to spearhead the UAW-CIO and the entire CIO in a major struggle against the Wall Street rulers of American industry for a living wage when 200 union delegates from nearly 100 GM plants, representing 225,000 production workers, adopted a set of demands that bring the UAW-CIO in a direct dash with profit-bloated General Motors.
These demands, worked out by Walter P. Reuther, international union president, and the Executive Board, include:

A wage package approximating a little over 30 cents an hour, to be divided in the following fashion: a 15-cent flat boost in hourly pay, ten cents an hour to be set aside for a pension plan, and five cents an hour to be used for a health and insurance program. In addition, vacation pay to be increased to seniority holders.
 
A guaranteed 40-hour work week for every week the men are called in.
 
A union shop and the check-off.

The GM strike program of 1945–46, including the ideas of higher wages without price increases, and opening the books of the corporation, were repeated by Reuther in his usual compromising fashion.
In case GM refuses to discuss the pension plan, the UAW-CIO wage demand automatically would remain at 25 cents an hour, a figure previously suggested by various GM local union presidents.
Of course, all the delegates knew,as Reuther’s statistics proved, that GM could grant the whole demand and still make hundreds of millions of dollars of profit in 1948, and they also knew that GM wasn’t likely to grant the demands. That is why there was not much debate on the demands themselves. One delegate tried to bring up the idea of an escalator clause in the contract but a factional speech by John De Vito, the Cleveland anti-Reutherite, antagonized the delegates and caused the idea to be lost in the shuffle. It was very evident that the delegates were in no mood for factional sniping, and the virtually unanimous support given Reuther’s proposals showed the ranks wanted him to lead the struggle against the corporation.
In this connection, the meeting of the International Executive Board, held prior to the GM conference, was marked by only one major clash, when anti-Reuther forces sought in demagogic fashion to boost the wage proposal of Reuther. Their idea was that one proves oneself more militant than Reuther by simply beating by a dime any wage demand he makes. This approach doesn’t impress many auto union militants.
What happens to the wage demands depends, as it did in the 1945–46 strike, not so much on the GM workers, but on what the CIO does to back them. If Philip Murray, CIO president, signs a contract with the steel corporations, setting a pattern it will be extremely difficult for the UAW to do other than follow suit. If the UE, which has a contract covering 30,000 GM workers, breaks the union front, as it did in the last GM strike, this will damage the UAW struggle.
The strategic position of the GM workers is improved within the auto industry, however, by the fact that 78,000 Chrysler workers, who are expected to make similar demands, will not sign a separate agreement as they did in the 1945–46 situation, which gave them 18½ cents while the GM workers were on the picket line asking for 30 cents. This is the advantage a unified union leadership brings. The Wage Policy Committee of the UAW has full control over that situation now, and includes both Reuther and Norman Mathews, Chrysler department director of the UAW.
One vital aspect of the GM fight does not depend, however, on any action the national CIO takes, and that is the question of getting a union shop. Under the Taft-Hartley law, the union must and will file a petition by February 15 for National Labor Relations Board elections to get membership approval of the union shop. Once this is accomplished,the union has the right to negotiate for the union shop but does not automatically get it. Nothing in the Taft-Hartley law says the corporations have to give it, even if voted by the ranks. It becomes a question of negotiation and finally a test of strength. A program such as that adopted by UAW Local 6 in Chicago indicates the way to victory in such a test.
 



DETROIT – The conclusion of a series of important local union elections in the United Auto Workers-CIO in this area revealed that there were no significant changes in the factional situation in this union.
Pro-Reuther forces won elections in key local unions which are usually considered weather vanes of the political temper and trends in the UAW. In Local 155, long a Stalinist stronghold, the Reuther forces succeeded in ousting John Anderson, leading Stalinist unionist, from his post as president. Last year Anderson survived a pro-Reuther victory that saw Nat Ganley, member of the national committee of the Stalinist party, defeated as business agent. This year Russell Leach, the pro-Reuther candidate, defeated Anderson by a few hundred votes.
At Dodge Local 3, Mike Novak and his slate were returned to office and in Chrysler Local 7 the Joe Hattley administration easily defeated the anti-Reuther bloc.
 
Test Mazey Strength
The election at Briggs Local 212 was closely watched by the entire UAW for it represented a major test of strength for supporters of Emil Mazey, UAW secretary-treasurer,against a combination of Stalinist and Socialist Workers Party supporters. In spite of the fact that a dirty Jew-baiting campaign against Ken Morris, the pro-Mazey candidate for president, featured the campaign, the slate headed by Morris won handily. It was a triumph for just decent unionism against the irresponsible factionalism of the unprincipled bloc of Stalinists and SWPers. At no time did the anti-Mazey bloc repudiate the vicious anti-Semitism which prevailed among the backward workers who followed them.
At Ford Local 400, two groups, both part of the Reuther tendency, fought for control of the local in the elections. The Musilli slate failed to obtain a majority by a slight margin,and run-offs for important posts are scheduled.
At Ford 600, the biggest local union in the UAW, there are three candidates for president at the present time. Percy Lewellyn, former regional director, is the candidate of the Stalinists; Tommy Thompson, incumbent president, apparently has the backing of Walter Reuther, UAW president, while Gene Prado, is being backed by Emil Mazey. What inner-factional developments take place before the actual elections is anyone’s guess. The fact is that a major test of strength between the pro- and anti-Reuther caucuses will again occur.
Although these local union elections have not attracted the attention they did last year, when Reuther was on the ascendancy, the two major factions did conduct strenuous campaigns, and the Addes-Stalinist bloc did make a serious effort to come back into power. In some key locals, like Packard 190, they did manage to retain control, but it is significant that there, Whitey Urban, the re-elected president, was the first union officer to announce after the recent national convention that he was signing the “no-Communist” affidavit under the Taft-Hartley law.
The expectation of the Stalinist bloc that their radical phrase-mongering on wage demands would bring them back into control of local unions did not materialize. As a matter of fact, in some local union elections, like Chrysler 7, the propaganda of the Stalinist bloc was written to appeal to the conservative workers. As usual the Stalinists, playing both ends against the middle policy did not fool many auto workers.
The turnout of the workers in balloting was considered good, in view of the terrible weather prevailing, and in some cases was even better than last year. The UAW militants have not gone to sleep by a long shot.
Most of the election literature was of an ordinary trade union character, with such issues as the Wallace candidacy for presidency being avoided, and with the political significance of the elections more indirectly concerned with the pro- and anti-Reuther fight than last year.
 



DETROIT – What is happening to wage negotiations between the major CIO unions and the Wall Street owners of big industry? The silence on the wage front prompts this question. An answer may serve to clear up some of the many doubts and confusions that exist in the labor movement today.
The UE-CIO quietly goes into negotiations with General Motors before the UAW-CIO begins its negotiations. The UE represents 30,000 workers, while the UAW-CIO speaks for over 200,000.
Philip Murray; CIO president, says less about the recent price increase in steel than Senator Taft. Murray informs the world that he wouldn’t think of striking this year for a wage increase. The steel workers’ contract is more sacred to him than the welfare of the steel workers, who desperately need a wage increase.
Walter Reuther and the entire UAW Executive Board spend a whole special session dealing with many things, but the dramatic publicity that marked the GM wage struggle in 1945–46 is lacking.
 
No Unified Strategy
One thing is obvious: There is no genuine unified strategy in the CIO top leadership for a bold, aggressive fight around a progressive program. If steel or UE or any other CIO union accepts any small wage increase it is almost certain to be the pattern. The UAW stands again in the position of not merely being a spearhead, but of perhaps standing alone!
How ironical that John L. Lewis and the coal miners may provide the spurt for an aggressive fight this spring by his pension demand of $100 a month.
There is no unified strategy, which is bad, but even worse there is no agreement or advocacy of wage policies which would be beneficial to all the mass production industry workers.
Is the CIO fighting for higher wages without price increases? Is the CIO basing its demands on “ability to pay”? What has happened to the idea of opening the books of the corporations? Why does the CIO oppose the escalator clause? To find an answer to these questions, one has to look beyond the CIO leadership. It’s only clearly distinguishable policy is silence.
 
Wage-Price Issue
In the 1946 wage struggle, now called the “first round,” the GM strike program of higher wages without price increases was sold out by UE and Phil Murray, who took wage increases which meant higher prices. These union leaders said prices were not the concern of labor! In retrospect, it is possible to see how wrong was the top CIO leadership which at that time consisted of a bloc between Murray and the Stalinists.
In 1947 these same labor bureaucrats quickly accepted an offer of 11½ cents an hour plus six paid holidays. and Walter Reuther, with his brief calling for 23⅛ cents an hour without price increases, was left holding the bag, along with the entire CIO rank and file. Reuther’s failure to fight consistently for the GM strike program deserves condemnation, but even his milk and water fight was progressive compared to the reactionary role Murray and the Stalinists played.
Once again the basic ideas in wage negotiations are being tested, and we have an opportunity to evaluate the CIO leadership, and all its tendencies.
To fight, for higher wages without price increases today means to struggle against Wall Street profiteering, for higher wages should come out of profits. Murray says in advance he won’t struggle for any wage increases, which is an indication of what a dead-hand grip and bankrupt policy he has to offer the CIO membership. (Imagine if he fought the steel corporations half as vigorously as he is going after the Stalinists, how effective that would be, against the steel companies ... and the Stalinists!)
Business Week recently had a good article exposing the Stalinist strategy in UE-CIO negotiations. They’ll talk tough, but already have agreed in advance to take the same contracts, and anything they can get in wages, for they are in a desperate situation in the union due to their phony attitude toward the Taft-Hartley law relating to signing of non-communist affidavits.
The Reuther leadership in the UAW-CIO is moving cautiously in wage negotiations. At Chrysler, negotiations have been postponed until March 24, and the two previous meetings have been mainly formalities.
The UAW-CIO puts out excellent publicity for higher wages without price increases, but this is meaningless unless the entire CIO unites behind this idea.
 
Ability to Pay
In the UE negotiations with General Electric, the corporation takes the offensive and says it cannot recognize the theory of ability to pay as the basis for wage demands. This is an acute problem and deserves consideration.
In 1946, GM said the same thing to Reuther. Reuther replied that industry had – or should have – a social responsibility.
Industry must have an ability to pay, That is why it exists, he said. GM replied, suppose we don’t have the ability to pay, suppose we don’t make money some year, will you take a wage cut? At this point, Murray and R.J. Thomas, then president of the UAW-CIO, replied, we agree, we don’t accept the theory of ability to pay, see what a trap it leads the labor movement into. Reuther himself was silent.
Reuther had no answer because he was afraid to follow the revolutionary implications contained in his higher wages without price increases formula and theory of ability to pay (they were interwoven).
What are these implications. If industry has the ability to pay higher wages without price increases, it means taking wage increases out of profit. If industry lacks this ability, it has demonstrated it is incapable of functioning for the welfare of the nation, and therefore ... instead of accepting wage cuts, as Murray and Thomas thought labor might have to do ... the logical conclusion is to call for nationalization of these bankrupt industries. And since its capitalist managers proved themselves bankrupt, naturally WORKERS’ CONTROL OF PRODUCTION was required, for the welfare of the entire nation (excepting the capitalist parasite, of course, who proved themselves bankrupt.) Reuther hesitated then, and now, to draw those conclusions.
Until the CIO movement adopts these basic ideas, or philosophy of the wage struggle, the kind of mess it finds itself in at the present time remains inevitable.
 
Open the Books
Two years ago, the slogan Open the Books by Reuther and the GM workers created a storm of reaction in the capitalist press. It was a wonderful idea. Let us, the workers, look at the books to see what the real financial situation is. We, the workers, have a fundamental right to a look at the books, for our labor makes production possible. Of course, this was a direct assault on the “sacred prerogatives” of big business.
Today the idea is just as valid. If it now lacks the force in negotiations that it had then, it is mainly because corporation profits are so fabulous, and well known, that “ability to pay” is an admitted fact. Likewise, outside of the Reuther leadership, the rest of the CIO has not yet accepted this idea as a sound one. It is beyond Murray’s comprehension, and as for the Stalinists, to accept it would mean to acknowledge Reuther was correct. That is why the Stalinists evade this, and slur over the idea of higher wages without a price increase.
A “Look at the Books” even today would show profits greater than those reported in annual reports. It would get down to details in exactly how much is extorted out of each worker. Today, it is vital that labor challenge the corporations’ control of industry, because of the anti-social character of capitalist control of production. That is why the slogan is so valid. A look at the books would signify an important advance of the working class in its struggle against Wall Street.
 
Escalator Clause
The last important idea required in wage negotiations is the escalator clause, sometimes called a “cost of living” bonus, but more often “the sliding scale of wages.” In essence,this sound idea consists of demanding a clause in the contract adjusting wages to the rising cost of living, after a fundamental minimum standard of real wages has been set up. When prices rise, an automatic wage increase would follow. Surely, in a period of inflation such an excellent idea should catch fire in the labor movement.
Instead, the only CIO union of importance that had such a clause in one of its major contracts took it out. It was the CIO oil workers union. The reason given was that it created a hardship on that one company, and also, that labor feared it would boomerang if prices went down. Neither are good reasons.
In my opinion, one of the major reasons why this “escalator” clause hasn’t been more popular is that one of its chief advocates, the SWP (Cannonites) have agitated for it in a sterile, sectarian fashion. Both in The Militant and in speeches at union meetings, SWPers keep referring to “the sliding scale of wages.” Only recently, when the commodity market suffered a temporary price decline, and when workers legitimately were asking, is this it? is this the beginning of the depression and low prices and wage cuts? a follower of the SWP got up and urged a union in negotiations to adopt the “sliding scale of wages.” Naturally the response was negative. Workers don’t want wages to slide. They want them to increase.
At the present time there are two forces operating in the labor movement which stand in the way of continued silence on the part of the top CIO leadership in wage negotiations. A major struggle by the coal miners would, and it appears will, force the Murray leadership in the CIO to put up a more militant struggle, or else lose additional prestige. Secondly, the UAW-CIO, and above all, its active militants are pressing for more action and results. In the UAW-CIO leadership, Reuther is conscious of his need to deliver something if his caucus is to retain its domination of the union.
 



DETROIT – The iron grip of the Stalinists over the Wayne County CIO Council was finally smashed, after one of the most hectic, turbulent and violent conventions ever seen in the CIO movement.
In spite of continual disruption, booing, heckling, bureaucratic rulings, sudden adjournments and every other trick in the Stalinist arsenal of “rule-or-ruin” tactics, the majority of the delegates, aided by the national CIO, cleaned out the mess.
This convention was almost an incredible spectacle. The final touch was supplied by the Leonard caucus and its SWP supporters. This caucus distinguished itself from the Stalinists in only one respect: numbers. In every other respect, the friends of the SWP spoke, functioned, acted and conducted themselves as chief assistant hatchetmen for the Stalinists.
The entire struggle at the convention was confined to the organizational plane, with one question predominating: Could the Stalinist leadership be ousted?
The anti-Stalinist forces, consisting mainly of a bloc of pro-Reuther and steel delegates, had a clearcut majority, even without any disputed delegations being seated. With the 90 or so disputed delegates seated, the anti- Stalinist forces, representing, the vast bulk of the CIO membership in this area, was an overwhelming majority.
 
Rule-or-Ruin in Action
The essence of the Stalinist strategy was therefore to keep the contested delegates from being seated, and by means of complete control of all committees and the chairman- ship to prevent the majority of delegates from expressing their will oh any question,
This could be accomplished best by preventing any serious debate, by creating a violent atmosphere which made any discussion impossible, and by filibustering the convention until enough anti-Stalinist delegates left to make a return of the Stalinist bloc to office possible. There is nothing new in these tactics. They are the hallmark of Stalinism in the labor movement.
Whet was the issue in dispute on seating the delegates? Over 90 delegates representing thousands of CIO members came to the convention after their local unions had paid four months per capita and they were denied entrance on the grounds they hadn’t paid one year’s back taxes.
It was on this issue that the SWP, repeating the CP, called a fight for “democracy versus bureaucracy.” Before the, last convention a similar arrangement had been approved by the national CIO at the request of the Stalinists – but that was last year. This year, fearing loss of control of the council, the Stalinists rejected such an arrangement.
More than that, the Stalinist clique was afraid to have the convention vote on that issue, for its defeat was assured by the democratic will of the majority. The issue in reality was just the opposite of that claimed by the Stalinists and the SWP. It was a case of a discredited minority, the Stalinists, seeking to keep bureaucratic control of an organization they had no political, organizational or any other kind of right to keep, because neither their policies nor leaders were acceptable to the majority of the delegates.
 
Key Report Stalled
On Thursday night, when the convention opened, the usual trick stuff was begun. A special resolution’ endorsing the strike of the De  Soto workers was introduced. Of course it was supported by everyone, even though it was just a stall to keep the credentials committee from making a report.
On Friday morning, in spite of many efforts to get a report from the credentials committee so that the issue could be debated and the Stalinists defeated, nothing happened. The noisy demonstrations, marked by a little scuffle now and then, made any action on the part of the anti-Stalinists impossible.
Meanwhile, the Stalinists added another touch to inflame the disputed delegates. The galleries were ordered cleared, and the delegates were left outside, unable even to see the convention as visitors!
The disgruntled delegates met downstairs from the hall and told Germer they would give him an hour in which to act, or they would take action to seat themselves. Whereupon Germer informed Tracy Doll, chairman of the session, that unless the credentials committee reported (and he told the credentials committee the same thing) he would have to move.
Finally, late Friday afternoon, the credentials committee, headed by Whitey Urban, president of UAW Local 190, made its report, denying the delegates full representation, and blasting “CIO interference and bureaucracy.”
Attempts to discuss the issue were made, but it was impossible because of the violent atmosphere. Noisy demonstrations greeted every anti-Stalinist spokesman, while the many sergeants-at-arms kept the anti-Stalinists from making much noise.
Germer outlined the CIO constitution dealing with this question of the relationship between local councils and the national CIO and easily demonstrated, of course, that the policies and rules of local councils were under the control of the national CIO.
He explained, and there was no denial, that Tracy Doll, Sam Sage and Coleman Young (Stalinists) had agreed in Pittsburgh to go along with the compromise formula that delegates be seated if local unions paid four months per capita (three months of that money to be held by the national CIO since no one trusted the Stalinists).
 
CPers Violate Agreement
He also explained how, the previous year, these same officers of the Wayne County Council (except Young, who was not elected then) had asked for such an arrangement from the national CIO, thereby recognizing the authority of the national CIO as final in such matters, and how the national CIO had approved. He warned the Stalinists against splitting.
A vote was in order, and it looked bad for the Stalinist-controlled credentials’ committee. But Ernie Mazey came to their rescue. He suggested to the chairman that the time for adjournment was past, whereupon Doll took the hint and arbitrarily adjourned the session.
Of course, many anti-Stalinist delegates felt that victory was at hand the next morning.
But they did not reckon sufficiently with the desperation of the Stalinists. All Saturday morning was stalled around, and finally, after some noisy debate, a rollcall began.
The results of the rollcall were obvious to everyone following the vote. The anti-Stalinist bloc had won by nearly 300 votes! Seating of the delegates seemed, to many of them, just a matter of minutes.
But – and this actually happened! – the committee counting the votes disappeared. No results could be announced. A real clever maneuver! And the convention was again adjourned by action of the chairman!
Enough was enough, and at this point Germer announced that the national CIO would conduct, the rest of the convention on Sunday morning at Local 174 hall. He urged all delegates to attend. It was all over for the Stalinists.
 
Convention Split
Some of the delegates wondered at this point if the Leonard caucus would dare participate in a rump convention if the Stalinists held one the next day or if they would retreat and participate in the convention under the authority they had been denouncing for the last three days.
This caucus had no choice. The next morning they recognized the legality of the national CIO action by walking into Local 174. The delegates cheered this action for it meant that everyone except the Stalinists recognized the Germer-called session as the legal one.
Meanwhile the Stalinists meeting at Local 17, made some speeches denouncing everyone and then adjourned, with all, remaining non-Stalinists breaking from them and going to the CIO convention.
Two important actions were taken on Sunday. National CIO policy regarding the elections, the Marshall Plan and the Reuther viewpoint on a new party were combined in one resolution and passed as a matter of course. A new leadership was elected with Mike Novak, president of Dodge Local 3, as president, A1 Barbour, of Local 7 as secretary-treasurer, and Fuller of the steel workers as executive vice-president.
Carrying out the farce to the very end, the Leonard-SWP caucus pulled another stunt that didn’t help their reputation any. Ernie Mazey, nominated against Novak for the presidency by Jack Lesnick of Local 36, declined after making a brief but violent denunciation of “this undemocratic convention” and these individuals walked out.
Among the many important features of this convention was the failure of the Stalinists to attempt even to put up a fight for their Wallace line. Rather they confined their whole struggle merely to retaining organizational control of the council. This played into the hands of the anti-Stalinists who mainly were behind “national CIO policy,” but weren’t too happy to engage in political debate on the national elections. Indirectly, of course, the political struggle was clear. Certainly in those circumstances a labor-party tendency would have difficulty in making its weight felt. But the SWP, having its leading spokesmen in Detroit there, made no effort to distinguish itself from the Stalinists. They confined their speeches and participated in the demonstrations strictly in defense of the Stalinist regime of the council. It will take considerable time and quite a change in their pro-Stalinist line to wipe out the disgrace they inflicted upon themselves.
While we disagree with the political policies (endorsement of Truman, etc.) of the majority of the delegates, certainly it was the duty of every union man to help bring the Wayne County CIO Council back into the CIO as an organization subject to the wishes of the American workers, in one form or another, rather than permit it to remain an outpost of the Stalinist wreckers of the labor movement.
 

  DETROIT – In case any autoworker hasn’t heard, there is a “new caucus” formed in the UAW-CIO. Richard T. Leonard, former UAW vice-president, announced its formation last week. According to the publicity thus far given out, this caucus is against all “ism’s,” against the Communist Party, against Walter P. Reuther, against Reuther’s “peace at any price policy,” and for better contracts,, social security, pensions, justice, good fellowship, as well as better jobs for the members of the caucus, especially those who once held union posts and have been retired from them by the rank and file in the elections during the past year. Among the great stalwarts who head this “new caucus,” are Tracy Doll, for years the mouthpiece of the Stalinists in the Wayne County CIO council, and a man about to lose his job. (He has broken with the Stalinist caucus recently – just by accident, to be sure, at a time when they appear to have lost control of the council, and power over his job.) Kenneth Forbes, recently deposed as regional director, is another leader. Ditto Tom Cunningham, twice defeated candidate for president of Local 7. Some of the other members of the national steering committee are Ernie Mazey, John Anderson, and Gene Butler, of Detroit, and Joe Berry of Flint. Whitey Urban of Packard local is another.  Flock to Murray Just to list some of the leaders is to indicate what this caucus represents. All the non-Stalinists in the Stalinists caucus, have joined together to break with their Stalinist buddies because the CP is pretty much through in auto. Indications of this break came recently in the Wayne County CIO council, when all these forces deserted the CP in its fight to retain control of the council, after Phil Murray, CIO president, put the heat on everyone. Murray demanded and obtained a postponement of the annual convention until non-affiliated locals could join and thus assure a sufficient majority to clean out the Stalinists. Tracy Doll, as president of the council, made the motion to support Murray’s telegram along those lines. Not to be outdone, Dick Leonard made a similar motion. But the final blow came when Erwin Bauer, of Local 306, also spoke for postponement of the convention (without acceding to Murray’s demands on representation). The CP all but uttered, “Et Tu Brutus,” at this display of independence. Until this meeting, the above mentioned people have been breathing fire and brimstone at the very mention of Murray’s name.  Something to Behold That meeting of the Wayne County CIO council was truly a spectacle to behold. The Stalinists were sick-looking, and deservedly so, at how their allies were suddenly finding themselves to be CIO patriots after all. The Reuther caucus sat through this meeting, enjoying themselves thoroughly, as they watched Doll, Leonard, and the others retreat to safer shores. This was just one of the events that caused the formation of the “new caucus.” Although the Leonard group hasn’t announced its full program, certainly enough has been presented for a critical analysis of this tendency. Take the matter of being against “isms.” To whom will that point in the platform appeal, except to the 100 per cent “American” type; that is, the reactionary and backward elements in the union. How some of the people in that caucus swallowed such a plank is almost difficult to understand. But then if your thinking can get you in the position where you believe Russia is a state worth defending, you can believe anything. Although we haven’t seen the Stalinist comment on the section against the Communist Party, we are sure they’ll denounce it as “red-baiting,” and point out, with some justice, that these same people called Reuther a red-baiter because he said either identical or similar things about the CP. But then such a switch in position is a minor trifle, in the interests of a clever maneuver, no doubt.  Sizzling Militancy The payoff comes on the big issue, “militant trade union policy.” And look who the speaker is: Dick Leonard, author of the company security clause in the Ford contract, the advocate of a lousy pension plan system which the Ford workers decisively rejected. Leonard denounced the results of the recent strikes and negotiations. The UAW-CIO should have obtained adequate social security, and pensions! Yes sir. And why didn’t brother Leonard say so during negotiations at Chrysler, for example, because, you see, he didn’t want to upset the apple-cart. So he went along, and made some speeches, along with his supporters, on how good the Chrysler contract was. And his supporters said Leonard deserves to be Chrysler director because of his outstanding work in Chrysler negotiations during the strike. And besides, Leonard led the opposition to any escalator clause, that sell-out clause which only the corporations and the nasty “Trotskyites” want. Just in passing, we’d like to see Leonard and Ernie Mazey on the same negotiating committee, when the issue of an escalator clause came up. Or is agreement on this question just another trifle, not to interfere with the formation of a “progressive caucus.” As for the “peace at any price” policy which Reuther allegedly follows, it seems that only recently in Detroit the Reuther forces led a strike at Chrysler which they organized. And prepared one at GM in event the corporation didn’t come through. But then, autoworkers are supposed to be simple-minded, and not remember such things. So this clique of disgruntled ex-porkchoppers, political opportunists, and ex-fellow-travelers, tried to sell this song and dance to the autoworkers. The response is not likely to be good.  Silence Not Always Golden There are a couple of other interesting points to bring up in preliminary discussion of this caucus. One of the burning issues before the autoworkers is the question of political action. Where does this caucus stand? Silence! Talk about militancy and bravery. Everyone knows where Urban and Cunningham stand. They are strong Wallaceites. Leonard, it can be safely said, is going along with Murray policy. So why in Marx’s sake should persons like Ernie Mazey take political responsibility for that kind of mish-mash tendency? Walter Reuther dismissed the whole thing as “just another example of the kind of factionalism the UAW members won’t stand for.” He’s a lucky fellow, for it would take a few political miracles to cause the Leonard caucus to make him lose any sleep. The Leonard caucus has announced a big meeting in September, where it intends to present a complete program. This we’ll watch with interest, and report our findings for Labor Action.   
  DETROIT – It happened even more rapidly than we assumed possible. The “new caucus” in the United Automobile Workers, CIO, headed by Dick Leonard, former vice-president, found itself divided and denounced by two members of its national steering committee for “red-baiting.” The Daily Worker on Monday, August 8, carried a story from Detroit that spilled some beans on his “new caucus.” Just read the story and imagine the discomfiture of the self-professed “progressives” and true-blooded “revolutionists” who are involved in that miserable conglomeration called the Leonard caucus. “Leonard, professing to speak for 100 locals in Michigan, lifted a leaf from Reuther’s own campaign for UAW presidency a year ago by announcing that his group will not allow the Communist Party to have a voice in union affairs.” When Reuther said that, he was denounced by the CP and the SWP for “red-baiting.” What does the SWP say now? Thus far, it has given the impression of taking full political responsibility for the line of the Leonard caucus. Tracy Doll and Whitey Urban denounced this part of Leonard’s statement. “Urban said Leonard issued his statement without Leonard’s caucus leaders getting an opportunity to see it, despite the fact that their names were signed to it.” Is this an example of the “democracy” to be practiced by a Leonard regime in the UAW-CIO? Or, even worse, was this statement released with the approval of Ernie Mazey and John Anderson? “To make the red-baiting dish palatable to the auto workers, who are dissatisfied with the wage-cutting GM escalator settlement and dropping of a number of basic demands in the Ford settlement, Leonard took a fly swat at Reuther’s handling of these settlements,” the Daily Worker said. We must admit that the characterization of Leonard’s program as a “fly swat” is rather accurate.  No Sign of Life Incidentally, as the time nears for the GM workers to obtain an automatic wage increase due to the escalator clause, it is becoming more and more uncomfortable for the alleged “left wing,” Leonard included, to talk about the GM contract approving “wage cuts.” We forgot to mention three other prominent individuals in this “new caucus.” They are Paul Silvers, Mel Bishop and Lloyd Jones. The inclusion of Mel Bishop is especially interesting. Certain self-styled “progressives” used as one of their main reasons for not supporting the Reuther tendency the fact that he had “reactionaries” like Mel Bishop in his. Bishop, according to these sources, was guilty of “slugging and beating up progressives.” But, then, that is a trifle, for Bishop apparently has “reformed,” about as much as Leonard has become a progressive. Now that the Wayne County CIO convention has been ordered for September 2, 3 and 4, it will be very interesting to watch this new caucus in action. Its birth, or more exactly, its still-birth, hardly gives assurances of any healthy life.   



The Legend of Henry Ford by Keith Sward
Rinehart & Company, N.Y 1948, 550 pp., $5.00.
An excellent, authoritative and devastating exposé of the legend of Henry Ford, billionaire auto manufacturer, has been written by Keith Sward, college professor, clinical psychologist and CIO journalist. It is the kind of work that one adds to a library collection alongside Ferdinand Lundberg’s America’s Sixty Families and other comprehensive studies dissecting American capitalism and its capitalists. Sward has put together a truly fascinating study of Ford. What was the real story of Ford’s anti-Semitism? Sward presents it so fully, with so many authoritative quotations, facts and evidence, that we doubt if the Ford Motor Company will venture an answer. How many people have forgotten that for years one of America’s wealthiest and most influential capitalists poured out thousands of dollars and utilized the power of his great industrial empire to agitate for Jew-baiting? Sward’s book is a good refresher course. It helps explain the deep roots that anti-Semitism has acquired in Detroit, for example.
Was Henry Ford an industrial genius? Yes and no. Sward presents the real story of the growth of the Ford Company, the part played by many brilliant engineers and the limitations of the mechanic from the backwoods of Michigan.
Although it is difficult to single out any single “robber baron” as a villain par excellence, Ford certainly is a contender for top honors. How he acquired the Lincoln Motor Corporation, for example, compares with anything any other robber baron pulled in the lusty days of capitalism. Sward has the facts.
Has the reader heard of the sinister organization known as, the Ford Service Department, directed by Harry Bennett? Of the tie-up between. Detroit’s tough gangsters of the ’20s and the auto industry? Of the brutal violence against any signs of revolt in the Ford empire? Of the murderous campaign against UAW-CIO attempts to organize in the late ’30s? Well, it is all told in exact detail by Sward. What an indictment of a “great capitalist” and his beloved system!
Surely this foretaste of the book should attract some reader attention. Here is a book that every UAW-CIO militant should read and understand. For Marxist scholars it is an invaluable contribution to a clinical analysis of American capitalism. This book destroys the myth of the five-dollar-a-day wage and the paternalism of Ford; it portrays the life of the auto workers in harsh terms of reality such as only Upton Sinclair achieved in his pamphlet: The Flivver King.
Perhaps the only serious weakness of the book is its failure to explain the reason why the myth of Henry Ford grew and developed into a powerful tradition in the era of Harding, Coolidge and Hoover, and the shameless role that the bourgeois press (including the New York Times) played in perpetuating the legend. The America of the 1920s, challenged by a revolutionary Russia transformed into a workers’ state by the October Revolution, needed myths of its rich to deceive the American working-man. “Every man a president or a Ford! Anybody can get rich in America.” This folklore had its purpose. If Ford didn’t exist, he would have had to be created.
Nevertheless, this and other lacks aside, Sward has contributed greatly to a genuine need in the field of social study. Fortunately also, his personal politics, which smack of Stalinism in the discussion of World War II, are at an absolute minimum and do not detract from the worth of this outstanding work. Finally: Detroit’s newspapers have not yet seen fit to review the book – a good recommendation in itself!
 



The deeply-rooted crisis in the CIO reached an acute stage this week with the presentation to the CIO executive board of the demands of the policy committee of the United Mine Workers of America.
Since the UMWA has long been considered the backbone of the CIO – witness its record of assistance to the building of the industrial union movement – and its 600,000 members constitute a powerful organized labor body, the issues involved can hardly be treated lightly by any serious CIO unionist.
For months the CIO unionists have watched with growing concern the impending struggle between the various tendencies in the leadership of the CIO unions, fearing another costly internal fight such as marked the Auto Workers Union in 1938 and 1939.
This concern has not been lessened by the provocative attitude and policies pursued by the Stalinist party clique in the CIO which has sought at each turn of events to force a split of the coal miners from the CIO under the guise of “isolating John L. Lewis,” as their May Day manifesto declared.
Acting as a spur to Philip Murray, CIO president, the Stalinists have inflamed the entire CIO with a bitterness which is designed to have one effect: Get Murray and other non-Stalinist CIO leaders to split irrevocably from the miners, so that only they and the Stalinists will be left in the leadership of the CIO.
The plan of the Stalinists is to try to take over the CIO by making a captive of Murray after the miners have been forced out or have departed from the CIO.
The reason for this strategy of the Stalinists is obvious: they want to hogtie the CIO completely to the war machine, giving up all elementary union rights, and they want to be in a position to put more pressure on Roosevelt on various international policies which will aid the Stalin regime in Russia.
While the differences between Murray and John L. Lewis are of vital importance, they are overshadowed in the long run by this fundamental difference which exists between all CIO unionists and the Stalinist clique in the CIO.
 
Split Would Be a Tragedy
It would be a major tragedy for the CIO union movement if it permitted a split on the present issues of dispute between the present leadership and the John L. Lewis forces. The CIO was founded on the principle of a democratic union organization, united on basic economic issues despite difference of race, creed, color or political views.
Of the present demands of the United Mine Workers – and it must be remembered that the policy committee has the legal authority to outline these policies – all can be discussed and decided democratically within the CIO if the rank and file intervenes against a split attitude.
The miners’ union demands that unity negotiations with the AFL be; renewed under the leadership of the committee chosen by the CIO convention in 1938. The members of, that committee are John L. Lewis, Philip Murray and Sidney Hillman, What can possibly be lost by the CIO in having an “exploratory” talk on labor unity? Surely the CIO: ranks are for unity with the AFL, unity based on industrial unionism in the mass production industries.
The prestige considerations of Lewis, Murray or anyone else must be secondary to this basic approach. Yet here the ranks of the CIO have seen, month in and month out, the top leaders playing prestige politics; with too little concern for the basic issues involved.
The bureaucratic regimes in the coal miners, and the steel workers, and many other CIO unions have made it possible for the top leaders of the CIO to get away with this kind of irresponsible leadership. This lesson must not be forgotten by the ranks!
Everyone in the labor movement knows that the Stalinists are bitterly opposed to labor unity because they fear that in a combined union movement they will be reduced to secondary power or purged! But what CIO unionist is concerned with preserving the power and prestige of the Stalinist clique, which turns and shifts on every issue, depending on what orders Stalin’s commissars give out?
 
Vicious Aims of Stalinists
All the flag-waving of the Stalinists against any opponents of its union-strangling policies is merely smokescreen to hide the nefarious aims of this gang of Kremlin stooges in the union movement!
The second demand of the coal miners is for recognition of a debt of $1,680,000 by CIO unions to the UMWA!
The proposal of the UMWA that this money be returned by deducting it monthly as a per capita tax payment to the CIO treasury puts the CIO board on the spot. How can the Murray-Hillman-Stalinist forces get around it without taking the blame for a split in the CIO?
All the shrieking of the Daily Worker and its new-found ally, the New York newspaper PM, against John L. Lewis and the United Mine Workers was based on the hope that if they hurled enough slander and violent charges, the United Mine Workers would depart from the CIO without these two major demands receiving any consideration. At this moment the strategy has not yet worked.
The third demand of the UMWA, which was not carried in detail by the press, was that the “attacks against the UMWA and its leadership desist!”
If this means that in practice no one has the right to disagree or dispute with the UMWA policy committee proposals, it is a bureaucratic demand worthy only of the Stalinists, who always seek to establish a totalitarian atmosphere in the labor movement!
 
“Calm Down” the Stalinists
But if it is a demand to Murray and Hillman that the present CIO leadership call a halt to the utterly inflammatory “rule or ruin” attacks of the Stalinists which go beyond the border of serious trade unionists in disagreement over policy, then the entire CIO would welcome a “calming down” of the Stalinist hatchet-men and their allies.
Behind the dispute on the union issues involved in the present struggle in the CIO and part and parcel of the whole situation are the differences between the various tendencies in the top leadership of the CIO on how to support the war.
The Stalinists are for all-out surrender of labor gains and rights, no matter what happens to the working class.
The Murray forces are wavering on this issue, tending one week to unite fully with the Stalinists in this policy and next week seeking, however feebly, to obtain some concession for labor like the union shop in steel and auto, and the dollar a day wage increase.
The Lewis forces have appeared to remain more intransigent on giving up labor’s gains and rights, with Lewis carefully exploiting the growing resentment on a national scale among the industrial workers against the inequality of sacrifice program prevailing today.
Incidentally, not the least of the reasons why Murray is so hot and bothered against Lewis is that he fears Lewis will recapture control of the CIO by this present policy. Of course this prospect is a nightmare to the Stalinists even more so!
Only the intervention of the CIO ranks to preserve the industrial union movement can halt any disastrous developments which might occur in this period!
 



CLEVELAND – The delegates and officers at the steel workers convention were somewhat different from those at other CIO conventions.
Philip Murray, Van Bittner, Clinton Golden and David J. McDonald were pretty old and tired looking. And they were obviously afraid of any serious dispute. A case of Lewis jitters, I call it.
The Murray forces, running the convention in traditional miners’ convention style (if you know what I mean), made it a point to distinguish themselves from the Stalinists there.
How the Stalinists, pleaded for a resolution opening a second front! But Murray, although behind a resolution for all-out support of the war, refused to give the Stalinists this concession.
Many delegates laughed and some were sore at the “party line” speeches on the second front idea. The Stalinists pleaded for the right to introduce an amendment to the Murray resolution on the war, but Murray bluntly refused. I guess he learned from John L. Lewis’ and his own sad experience with the Stalinists in the past.
One of the most frequently discussed subjects after convention sessions was the John L. Lewis problem. Opinions varied. The Lewis forces kept silent on the convention floor. William Mitch, Southern director of the SWOC and a Lewis man, didn’t even show up at the convention. He was conspicuous by his absence.
The Stalinists insisted Lewis was an outright fascist. Some delegates expressed a desire to see Lewis as president of the CIO again: “He doesn’t give concessions as easily as Murray.” Others feared for their bureaucratic posts if Lewis regained power. By no means was there any definitive opinion, such as the daily press would indicate, of 100 per cent support of Murray.
If Murray had come to the convention with a dollar a day wage increase and the union shop in Little Steel granted, his future as steel leader and CIO president would be assured. But he didn’t.
 



My attention has been called to a sentence in an article I wrote last week for Labor Action which is open to misinterpretation. It reads: “Even if Lewis does not appear this week before the CIO executive board, the ill-concealed threat he has of pulling the miners, and other unions he influences, out of the CIO into a unified labor movement is sufficient to speak more eloquently at the CIO executive board than,” etc. It goes without saying that any attempt on the part of Lewis to “pull the miners” out of the CIO would be an outrage perpetrated upon the interests of the labor movement as a whole and an act of disloyalty and split not less reprehensible than the one committed sometime ago by Dubinsky in withdrawing the ILGWU from affiliation to the CIO.
It is equally obvious that for the miners to split from the CIO and join the AFL would not at all signify that the labor movement has been genuinely and effectively united. I want to emphasize this as heavily as I can, just because the loosely-worded phrase in last week’s issue may have given rise to a misunderstanding of our real position.
 



A major policy of the CIO officially advocated at every opportunity is the Murray Plan for labor’s role in the war.
Murray’s plan visualizes the President of the United States establishing “a council for each basic and vital defense industry. Each council shall consist of an equal number of representatives of management and of the labor union in the industry, together with one government representative, the latter to serve as chairman.” The councils would be known as the steel industrial council, the auto industrial council, etc.
Over these industry councils would be the decisive National Defense Board, with equal representation for industry and labor, of which the President would be chairman. It would plan and control the entire war production drive.
The objectives of these organizational proposals would be, in the words of Murray:
“1. To guarantee the production of armaments in needed quantities and on time, by achieving the highest possible productive efficiency of American industry, through the full and complete cooperation of industry, organized labor, and government.
“2. To guarantee the production of domestic or non-military goods in adequate quantities so as to further improve and extend the American standards of living through a more equitable distribution of the national income, thereby improving the morale of the American people, and preventing a chaotic breakdown of our domestic economy when the national defense program is completed.
“3. To preserve the basic democratic rights of the American people; namely, freedom of speech, assembly, and worship, and the free right to organize into independent associations for lawful purposes, such as the right of labor to organize into unions of its own choosing for collective bargaining and other mutual protection.”
 
Industry and the President Balk
Since the Muffay Plan was presented long before December 7, 1941, the first observation to be noted is that it was not approved by two of the three necessary parties to any such action, namely, industry and the President.
That Murray understands at least partly why his proposals have been cold-shouldered is indicated in the report he made to the CIO convention. “It is because labor does not trust the employer, the employer in too many instances, does not trust labor, government doesn’t trust either. And it seems to me that neither labor nor the employer trusts too much in government,” he declared.
The starting point of an analysis of the Murray Plan must then be in seeking the underlying causes of the antagonisms which Murray describes. For surely, no plan which proposes a love-and-kisses relationship between capital and labor can succeed unless the causes of the present antagonism between the classes involved can be eliminated!
Let us begin this examination by reviewing the incidents arising from the attempts to apply the Murray Plan itself, or rather an application of the Murray Plan to the auto industry, the Reuther Plan. Why didn’t the auto barons accept the Reuther Plan? Why was there such a sharp cat and dog fight between them and the labor unions, despite the fact that the latter support the war?
C.E. Wilson, president of General Motors, gave the answer: “We made 32 cents on the dollar on auto sales, and only nine cents on the dollar on war orders.” The longer the auto industry could oppose conversion to war production – despite the fact that such conversion was in its general, basic class interests – the more immediate profit it could make.
And as everyone knows, that is the main purpose of business – to make profit. Nothing more nor less!
 
Industry’s Main Purpose – Profits
Even when industry was forced to convert to war production, it kept clearly before its eyes the reason for its existence, namely, the gathering of profits.
Could there have been any more dramatic and convincing proof of industry’s preoccupation, with profits before all else? And that’s why labor doesn’t trust the industrialists! They are economic enemies; their basic interests conflict.
In asking labor to have faith and trust in the employing class, Murray asks an action on the part of the workers which would betray their class interests, he asks them, in effect, to have faith in and to aid their enemies.
Once we understand why labor doesn’t trust and opposes the bosses, then it is easy to see why the bosses feel the same way about labor, especially organized labor. They know that unions are the most effective means in the workers’ struggle for at least enough wage’s to live on.
The czars of industry will have faith in the labor unions only when labor gives up its straggle for a decent standard of living. Which means that the bosses will trust labor only when labor cuts its own throat! That’s the price that Murray and the CIO leadership would have to pay if they really want to gain the “confidence” of the bosses.
We have seen therefore that what Murray described as the antagonisms of the present moment are in reality basic to the form of society in which we live: capitalism. Capitalism is a society in which a few men own the means of production and operate them for their private profit. The government, regardless of how “liberal” it may be, functions in the basic interests of this capitalist class. So long as this economic system continues to exist, the antagonisms between labor and the bosses, between labor and the government will continue to exist, no matter what Murray or anyone else may wish.
There is only one antagonism which Murray describes, which is not basic to capitalism and which exists because of the present peculiar situation. That is the antagonism between the bosses and the government, to the degree that it exists at all.
 
Bosses and Government Agree
It should be remembered that on all the basic issues of the day industry and the government agreed the continuation of the capitalist system, of exploitations; the prosecution of the imperialist war for profit, to name only two of the most important. But on one thing there is some disagreement between industry arid the government.
Industry dislikes the Roosevelt regime because it puts brakes on the more obvious and ruthless employers’ exploitation of workers. Big industry wants to return to the “good old days” of the open shop, when union men were fired at will and wage cuts came any time the companies wanted to increase profits.
The Roosevelt Administration understands that labor is too powerful for that kind of treatment, that gigantic struggles would ensue if the pig-headed methods of management were openly employed; so it seeks to act as a buffer.
If the war continues to go adversely for the Allies and they must therefore have a perspective of a long, gruelling war – as now appears certain – it becomes clear that this disagreement will in large measure disappear and that the capitalistic government will necessarily (from its own class point of view) be forced to adopt more and more of the open repressive measures now advocated by certain sections of of industry. More and more there would then be agreement on the “need” for smashing at labor’s standards and rights.
The capitalists and military brass hats look with considerable envy at Hitler Germany, which has demonstrated that in order to achieve Point 1 of Murray’s plan (”Production of armaments in needed quantities and on time”) under capitalism and to do so with a profit for the capitalists too, it is “necessary” to destroy the union movement.
Here, then, is the first and basic contradiction of the Murray Plan. Its first objective – UNDER CAPITALISM – can be accomplished fully ... by destroying the trade union movement.
For capitalism to conduct this war with the efficiency required to destroy its Nazi opponent, it will find it increasingly “necessary” to adopt Hitler’s methods: subordination of labor’s class interests to the interests of Wall Street and its war, rnilitary dictatorship or semi-dictatorship to smash the labor movement.
Naturally no worker is for such class slavery. Where workers criticize the production plans of the present industrial and war machine, it comes from a recognition of the incompetence of the capitalist class, its social decay and degeneration which make it impossible for it even to conduct its own war efficiently; and not from any desire to see the adoption of Hitler’s methods in America. The conclusion to be reached from such criticism of the inefficiency and incompetence of capitalist war production, is not that capitalism should adopt the methods of Hitlerism, but that rather socialism should be substituted in order really to smash fascism and its roots.
It is clear then that to criticize the capitalist industrial and war machine from this point of view is completely different from supporting the Murray Plan.
 
Second Objective of the Plan
The second main objective of the Murray Plan is to provide “guns and butter.” Murray points out, and correctly, “the production of domestic or non-military goods in adequate quantities so as to further improve the American standards of living ... [is necessary] ... to improve the morale of the American people ...”
Doesn’t he know in this war the choice is guns OR butter! And hasn’t the recent experience of the American people shown that the Roosevelt regime has made its choice: GUNS!
And the only “butter” the American people will get is the amount of wage increases the CIO can wrest from the bosses in struggle (steel; aluminum and auto today).
Isn’t is plain that only in so far as the CIO struggles against the workers paying the burden of the war, which both the Roosevelt Administration and business desire, can Objective II of the Murray Plan be achieved. Not in cooperation with the bosses and the Administration but in struggle against their aims to load the workers down with the war cost!
Objective III of the Murray Plan is an excellent summary of the purposes of the CIO, its struggle to extend democratic rights, its determination to organize all unorganized workers, etc.
But Murray forgets to ask a simple question. Against whom does the CIO have to struggle to obtain democratic fights, to organize and bargain collectively? The very people with whom he proposes to enter into a love-and-kisses relationship, namely, the industrial barons.
In so far as the CIO has achieved some democratic fights for the workers in the mass production industries, it did so through years of hard and bitter struggle against the bosses, who wanted to keep labor unorganized because that meant more profits for the companies.
All the speech-making, conferences, pleas for cooperation with management fell on deaf ears. Industry listened only when labor demonstrated its might and power. When the General Motors workers won the sit-down strike in 1937, when Ford was conquered on the picket lines, when the steel workers avenged the Little Steel massacre!
 
Leopard Can’t Change Its Spots
After 100 years of bitter struggle against labor, Murray proposes that the bosses change their spots. He, proposes that the bosses surrender peacefully to the establishment of more democratic rights, or bigger and more powerful unions.
When Murray preaches this mutual faith and trust between capital and labor, he is deceiving the workers, for such a condition is impossible. The class interests of the two contenders are fundamentally different. And the whole history of the development of the CIO demonstrates this fact irrefutably.
To summarize: The Murray Plan is a utopian dream based on a world that doesn’t and can’t exist. Its basic error flows from Murray’s failure to recognize the simple fact that in present-day society there are two antagonistic classes always in struggle of one kind or another.
The first objective of the Murray Plan flows from open and full support of the imperialist war. It means, in practice, as we pointed out, to subordinate labor defense to the defense of Wall Street’s world imperialist interests. It is in direct contradiction to the last two aims of the Murray plan.
Those aims in the Murray Plan which appeal to the workers, the achievement of a higher standard of living, the attainment of more democratic rights, the organization of the unorganized, can be accomplished only if the CIO stands on the policies which marked its formation and successes of recent years: the policy of militant and direct struggle against the bosses.
 



In the epoch of the ascendancy of American capitalism and the concomitant growth of large-scale industry, the development of the labor movement was marked by a stormy and turbulent character. The Pullman strike, Homestead and Haymarket are but a few of the names that hold a special place of honor in the great tradition of the American labor movement. The First World Imperialist War did not retard this development. From the timberlands of the Northwest to the clothing factories of the East, labor continued its battle during the war. And the post-war period was even more openly a period of great clashes between capital and labor. The Seattle general strike, the 1919 steel strike, and the miners’ walkout are three of the highpoints of this stage.
Only for the brief years from 1925 to 1939 did there emerge a relatively “stable” labor movement, the American Federation of Labor, whose varying fortunes from 1881 never before took such a turn for the worse that its very existence was jeopardized. For the Federation, “the aristocracy of labor,” had always managed to keep its place with the bosses as a bulwark against industrial unionism. It was precisely in the 1925–29 period, too, that tons of literature was published proving that the American way of life was permanent and that such ideas as industrial unionism to protect the interests of the millions of mass production workers was a radical utopian dream.
The crash of 1929 destroyed in one fell swoop the vast array of imposing notions about the American way of life. It created the objective basis for a mass movement of the industrial workers, those teeming millions who suffered most keenly from the economic collapse. In the breadlines, unemployed demonstrations, eviction battles and sporadic strike struggles, the subjective basis for the CIO found its roots. The San Francisco general strike in 1934, the Toledo Auto-Lite struggle, the Minneapolis teamsters’ fight were preludes, dress rehearsals in a sense, for the coming struggles of the CIO. These battles revealed that the stormy and turbulent characteristics of the early American labor movement were not something due only to historical conditions of another day. The militancy of the American worker was an integral part of his life, his way, irrespective of the epoch of his existence.
The struggle to establish permanently an industrial union movement in America was the crowning achievement of labor. The story of the CIO is the most brilliant chapter in the history of the labor movement. The sit-down strike wave of 1936–37 assumed nation-wide proportions and built the CIO. Even the ghastly Little Steel strike defeat could not shake its foundations. And in the face of the coming war, and the growth of reaction, the CIO marched forward to greater struggles and victories. Little Steel was fought over again. This time the CIO triumphed. Henry Ford, symbol of open shop-ism, tumbled from his throne and the CIO obtained a closed shop agreement. And just before the declaration of war, the powerful United Mine Workers of America, long the backbone of the CIO, stood off a combined challenge of the Roosevelt Administration and the steel trust over the issue of the union shop in the captive mines.
 
The Victim of Industrial Unionism
At long last industrial unionism, an indispensable need for the mass production workers, was established permanently in the nation which prided itself on its observance of the “principle of the open shop.” The Knights of Labor had come and gone in the latter part of the 19th century. The Industrial Workers of the World flashed across labor’s horizon like a brilliant meteor, but it too failed in the attempt to organize the industrial workers. The CIO, however, accomplished the main objective.
For many capitalists, and not a few of their journalistic hacks, the CIO was destined historically to play the rôle of an IWW in the Second World Imperialist War. By favoring the AFL against the industrial workers, as was done in 1917–1918, it was hoped to weaken and divide the labor movement and tear asunder the CIO. However, the period of major concessions to organized labor is past. Favors on the grand scale to the AFL are not possible today, as they were in 1918. Besides, the CIO dominates the key war industries. Its power is too great for a head-on collision, as was possible with the IWW, which was isolated from the rest of labor by a virulent propaganda campaign and physical terror.
The CIO withstood even the calamity of bitter internal dissension fomented primarily by the Stalinists in their pursuit of a “rule or ruin” policy. Its militancy and achievements have kept on the statute books the Wagner Act and other social legislation which compels the courts to treat labor with some degree of “respectability.” And the AFL with its antiquated ideas of craft unionism which it tried to impose on the industrial workers in 1934–35 and 36, has lost face with the industrial toilers. The test of events, the verdict of history, stands behind the CIO.
 
Potential Strength of American Unionism
Today the CIO, representing 5,000,000 organized industrial workers, is strongly entrenched. The transformation of American economy into a war economy creates the objective possibility of increasing the ranks of the CIO by millions more as government officials estimate that war production industry will employ between 15,000,000 and 20,000,000 workers. Combine this economic development with the fact that the CIO is already established in this field, and one can easily foresee an industrial union movement in America of truly staggering proportions! Naturally, the unfolding of this vista will not take a cut-and-dried character. There will be advances and retreats, marked as always by the violent characteristics previously described.
Since the AFL boasts of another 5,000,000 organized workers, and the railroad brotherhoods are measured by more than another million members, the combined strength of the American labor movement already surpasses any in the history of the labor movement. It is the specter of this combined strength which so badly frightened the Roosevelt regime and the Wall Street bosses when John L. Lewis recently proposed labor unity. This was openly admitted by all leading capitalist magazines and newspapers, as shown in the survey of the Twohey Associates, a sort of Gallup Poll in the publishing field.
Roosevelt’s ability to block labor unity through his influence over the present CIO top leadership, and his supporters in the AFL executive council, is not of a lasting character. The six-man board he proposed and set up as a spurious substitute for a genuine unity of the two organizations is another of his notorious patchwork proposals which new events will split asunder. The advantages of labor unity are too great for any capitalist politician to block them permanently. When the Gallup Poll indicated recently that 71 per cent of the ranks of the AFL and the CIO were for labor unity, it was testimony that the workers realized the period of rivalry between the organizations was coming to an end. Industrial unionism was established, and this had been the basis for the split in the AFL. The attractive powers of one unified organization, its strength in the economic and political fields, were also foreseen by both the bosses and the workers. No doubt, the close call labor had on the Smith “slave labor” act, which passed the lower house of Congress, had its effect on the bureaucrats as well as the ranks.
In the recent conferences held in Washington, the day-today events have demonstrated likewise the advantages to labor of working as one unit. When the National Defense Mediation Board, now a defunct body, ruled against the United Mine Workers of America on the captive coal mine union shop issue, the real damage was caused by the fact that the AFL representatives had joined with industry and the government against the CIO. But when the two labor organizations made a bloc at the industry-labor conference held subsequently in Washington, the closed shop principle was not sacrificed at the altar of the employers. At the present writing the labor movement has 26 cases before the War Labor Board, which is of course the old National Defense Mediation Board dressed up in a new title. Most of them involve the union or the closed shop. The decisions of the War Labor Board depend largely on how effectively the CIO and AFL work together and against industrial and government representatives on this board. Significantly, the CIO and the AFL representatives have agreed to hold a joint caucus and act as a fraction. This is another demonstration of how the vital needs of the labor movement are forcing a trend toward organizational unity, despite past and present differences. Incidentally, the AFL, which has the closed shop as a principle, can give the CIO the benefit of this one good tradition in the older organization. It should be remembered that the combination of industrial unionism and the closed shop afford the best basis for labor’s struggle in the gigantic industries.
 
Roosevelt and the Voice of “Ma” Perkins
The unprincipled character of the American labor bureaucracy is demonstrated by its actions of joining without any serious questions or doubts, boards like the War Labor Board, or the new Roosevelt labor board. The bitter experience of the CIO on the National Defense Mediation Board apparently is a closed chapter to Phillip Murray, CIO president, who placed himself along with Sidney Hillman of the Amalgamated Clothing Workers, under the thumb of Roosevelt, alongside of the contemptible William Green, president of the American Federation of Labor. Labor unions are going to learn through their own experiences the need for demanding the resignation of their leaders from these kinds of set-ups, which are openly admitted to exist primarily for the purpose of tying the union movement to the imperialist war machine.
The Roosevelt Administration is placed in a great and insoluble dilemma by the development of the labor movement up to this war. Its first major task must be to get labor to pay the major burden of the war. In a country unorganized, or disorganized, labor cannot struggle effectively against paying the war cost. But in America, the price of smashing labor openly is the same which France paid. Not the least impressive lessons from recent European affairs was the vast difference between the conduct of the French working class, crushed and demoralized when its general strike was broken by Daladier. Through the use of the army just before the war began, and the conduct of the English workers in supporting largely the Churchill government through the deception of “having a say in the government” in the personages of Ernest Bevin and Major Clement Attlee. Roosevelt knows this, and that is why he doesn’t permit the Southern poll-tax congressmen to run wild too often.
How to get the labor movement to give up its union standards – the very reason for its existence – is the question which Roosevelt must try to answer. For that is the only possible, although not very probable, solution to the dilemma. Secretary of Labor Perkins stated the problem succinctly enough in a speech on January 27th which appeared in the New York Times: “Men and women now on the job must keep every machine running, regardless of the sacrifice entailed.” And after outlining a six-day week and other modifications of present union contracts, she added: “These standards must be relaxed if and when necessary for total war production.” Her policy statement which was also approved by the War and Navy Departments, was amplified by Verne A. Zimmer, director of the Labor Department’s Division of Labor Standards: “Existing state laws place a limitation upon hours of work, particularly for women and minors. State regulations also, in some jurisdictions, ban Sunday work, prohibit night work for women and minors, and require one day’s rest in seven. When these or similar laws stand in the way of top production demanded by the war program, relaxation or easement should be effected promptly, as pointed out in the policy statement.” There is Roosevelt’s labor program in a nutshell.
 
Dangers in War Labor Board
The War Labor Board and any other agencies set up by Roosevelt are the facades under which the union movement will be slowly squeezed out of its gains and standards. The rôle of the labor leaders on these boards will be to cover up their real meaning. However, the pressure of the men in the plants will not be lacking, and will manifest itself through the regular union channels. Of course, in the first period of the war, the natural tendency to resist the breakdown of union conditions will be partly sublimated in the spirit of self-sacrifice, another quality distinctly working class in character. But a few more reports like the Truman revelations, which show what fabulous profits the munitions makers and other Wall Streeters are gorging from the war effort, will arouse a different spirit among the workers. [1]
The battle of production will not merely take the form of fighting to increase the war materials necessary for the grandiose strategy of American imperialism. Nor will it reflect itself only in the lowering of present union standards. It will intensify the antagonisms within the factories because it means the introduction of new technological devices, which brings technological unemployment, and, above all, the speed-up of the men at the machines. It should not be forgotten that the burning issue o£ the General Motors sit-down strike was the speed-up which reached a tempo a human could no longer stand.
All these conditions will react strongly on the leadership of the unions within the plants, the shop stewards. It is true that the labor bureaucrats have pledged their unions to a no-strike policy. However, i£ the labor leaders spend their energy in resisting the just demands of the ranks, it is probable – the Washington politicians expect it – the actions will take place anyhow. And the shop stewards, as in England, will become the more direct leaders of the unionists. This development has also the effect of making the union movement more democratic since the ranks participate as a whole in the shop in the determination of their immediate destinies.
To counteract this significant development, one can expect the “outside” union leadership, the international officers who find themselves further and further removed from the immediate vicinity of the ranks, to seek to retain their influence and control by obtaining increased participation of the organized labor movement in the war machine. Perhaps along the lines of the English experience. (How nice of the Labor Party representatives in Parliament, for example, to take the main responsibility and blame for the conscription of man power, through Ernest Bevin, the minister of supply. How nice of it to save Churchill the political embarrassment, and a major political crisis, over the issue of conscription of wealth, by taking the matter up first in the Labor Party caucus, and then rejecting it, after the Tory pleas of Bevins and Attlee. So the issue failed to arise in Parliament.) Et tu, Murray!
 
Labor’s Future Depends upon Its Struggle
The grand sweep of world and national events which are hitting labor with such a powerful impact, the perspectives outlined herein, indicate that the course of labor will continue along its classic lines: storm and strife. But the inability of capitalism to offer major concessions will tend to give purely economic struggle of the working class less results. Economic struggles, that is, strikes, will continue and sometimes reach unabated fury. But the problems of today demand further and more general solutions. The problem of cost of living, for example, of the coming rations, is one which strikes alone cannot settle. Action on the legislative front becomes more imperative. The CIO has already gone in for more “legislative and balloting” action, as an organized body, than any other labor movement of the past. The political education, therefore, will continue. And in the objective situation arising, there will also arise even more sharply the need for independent political action.
Labor’s perspective for this war is only “blood, sweat, tears and toil” insofar as the Roosevelt Administration has plans for it. But the economic conditions, the class interests, the rich traditions, the glorious opportunities for expansion, and the growing political consciousness of the American workers, indicate that labor has for itself, in a groping, unclear fashion at present, to be sure, a different perspective. For the American labor movement is now the mightiest in the world. It hasn’t gone through the terrible defeats and demoralization of the European working class. It is fresh, growing, militant and unafraid, as its history shows.
Labor has come of age in America.

Footnote
1. The CIO Economic Outlook, in its yearly forecast, just published its conclusions for 1942. Besides an increase in unemployment by 2,500,000 due to war economy dislocations, thereby bringing the total unemployment figure to 7,500,000, the CIO report contrasts the trend for a reduction in the real wages of employed labor, to the soaring profits of industry. The CIO report emphasizes that all efforts to increase war production will Intensify these glaring contradictions. Here, as in the CIO upsurges in 1936–37 and 1939–40, are the objective economic conditions which are the basic cause of turbulent “labor relations.” And while “priorities unemployment is fundamentally a temporary phenomenon,” as explained in the last issue of The New International by James M. Fenwick, the scars of this experience will remain. The present crisis In the auto industry is a case in point.
 



The Roosevelt Administration joined hands this week with the
powerful corporations to prevent the CIO from obtaining a nationwide
demand for a dollar-a-day wage increase to meet the mounting cost of
living.
Leon Henderson, Roosevelt’s price administrator, sent a
letter to the War Labor Board, which has before it two crucial CIO
test cases, and urged the board not to grant any substantial wage
increases.
Last Friday at the White House, President Roosevelt had read the
same letter to the six-man CIO-AFL board which had its first meeting
with him, according to the New York Times.
Significantly, neither, Phillip Murray nor William Green told
their union ranks after the meeting with Roosevelt that he had put
pressure on them against getting wage increases.
The CIO has before the War Labor Board the cases involving the
Little Steel companies and their 155,000 employees. The SWOC, as part
of the CIO, has demanded one dollar a day wage increases and the
union shop from these companies.
Apparently knowing that the Roosevelt administration would assist
them to beat down labor, the steel companies refused to grant any
important concessions, and now the case is before the War Labor
Board.
Since the War Labor Board itself is packed with friends of
business, they hardly need any encouragement to turn down pleas of
the CIO for wage increases and union security.
 
FDR’s Encouragement
However, the open assistance of Roosevelt and Henderson will give
them further courage to prevent labor from getting enough wages to
begin to meet the rising cost of living.
The fact that the CIO auto union also is demanding one dollar a
day and the union shop, and that the CIO aluminum workers have
presented a similar set of demands to their bosses, makes the steel
union demands before the War Labor Board decisive, since the verdict
of the board in the steel situation will be the precedent for the
other union negotiations.
The wages of nearly 1,000,000 CIO men from coast to coast are
directly involved in the demands before the War Labor Board, and the
action of the President and Henderson therefore is a serious frontal
attack at the CIO standards.
The mood of the ranks of the CIO, under the pressure of the rising
cost of living, and the terrible toll that priorities unemployment is
taking, were indicated over the week-end in the conference of over
160 delegates to the General Motors division of the CIO union in
Detroit.
Even R.J. Thomas, president of the CIO auto union, talked in
tough, plain language, fitting into the mood of the ranks who are fed
up with the present run-around they are getting everywhere.
“Some people say we should give up the class
struggle. I don’t know much about the class struggle. All I am
interested in is better economic conditions,” etc., etc.
 
Pressure from Ranks
Thomas’ Speech doesn’t mean that the CIO top
leadership suddenly has decided to go all-out in struggling for
labor’s just demands. It shows, rather, how the leadership is
being forced to respond to the pressure of the ranks, and put up some
kind of a fight for the CIO demands. The Thomas speech assumes
special importance in view of the fact that he was one of the six men
at the White House conference last Friday.
The major argument of Henderson and the President against granting
labor and wage increases was such an insulting one to the
intelligence of workers, that apparently none of the top AFL or CIO
leaders fell for it. It was the stock argument of all reactionaries
at all times against wage increases.
“If you increase wages, prices will go up, and inflation
will result,” claimed Henderson in his letter to the War Labor
Board.
But labor knows that big industry is falling over itself in the
huge profits pouring in from war orders. All labor is asking today is
that part of those profits be turned into wage benefits. This could
be done easily, without in the slightest increasing prices generally.
Big business always tries to increase all prices, every time it is
forced to pay a wage increase, thereby trying to pass off the cost on
the consumer. But the Roosevelt regime could prevent that easily,
simply by telling the Corporations they couldn’t raise prices,
and that labor’s wage demands should be granted by taking them
out of the profit.
Instead, we have the brazen attempts of the administration to
assure big industry that its war profits will be safeguarded, while
labor pays the burden of the war on the battlefield, in the factory
and at the store.
 



Fearing the independent power and vast influence of 10,000,000 organized workers unified into one organization, President Roosevelt brazenly maneuvered last week to block labor unity between the CIO arid the AFL, and to substitute in its place a spurious peace plan.
His direct intervention, as President and as a capitalist politician, into the internal affairs of the labor movement, in order to carry out a “divide and rule” policy, set a most dangerous precedent for the union movement, and one which should be repudiated by labor.
The prospects of immediate labor unity frightened the Roosevelt regime and the big industrialists, primarily because they realized that the attractive powers of a unified labor movement would bring millions of more workers into the unions.
Roosevelt also knew he would have much more difficulty in controlling such a vast union movement, so he rushed to counteract the effects of John L. Lewis’ proposal that labor unity be achieved promptly. The big majority of the capitalist newspapers and magazines, as part of the drive to block labor unity, twisted and turned the issues involved so that they might confuse the ranks of labor.
In explaining why the press turned against the Lewis proposal, James S. Twohey Associates, a service which specializes in studying and reporting newspaper editorial opinions, said it resulted from four factors:

Fear of too powerful a labor group.
Fear that Lewis would control all labor.
Fear that labor would be in a better position to press for the closed shop.
Fear that labor was not sufficiently aware of its own responsibilities to warrant one federation.

The main factor of these four according to the survey, was the basic fear that labor would become too powerful!
 
Most Convincing Argument
Could there be any stronger, more convincing arguments for labor unity, as outlined in last week’s Labor Action, than the openly expressed, almost hysterical fear the bosses have of labor unity!
There is an historical parallel between the ways the newspapers reacted to John L. Lewis’ proposal for labor unity and his moves to form the CIO in November 1936.
At that time, fearing industrial unionism, the newspapers sought to confuse American workers and alienate them from the CIO by saying that the only effect of the growth of the CIO would be to make Lewis a dictator.
Events showed, however, that the advantages to the rank and file workers in mass production industries by the victories of the CIO far outweighed any personal gains Lewis might try to make out of the situation.
Essentially the same thing holds true today for the proposal for labor unity. The advantages to the ranks of labor, as outlined in our last week’s article, far outweigh any personal advantages which Lewis might seek to obtain through his proposal.
Especially since the basic issue between the CIO and the AFL, namely, craft unionism vs. industrial unionism in mass production industries, has been settled in favor of the CIO, and no labor official, of any group, could get to first base if he were to try shattering the industrial unions into helpless craft union organizations.
The actions of the CIO executive council in rejecting Lewis’ proposal were reactionary because they placed the CIO formally under the thumb of Roosevelt and they failed to answer clearly and honestly the issues involved in labor unity.
Few newspapers reported that Lewis proposed to the CIO council a special convention to debate the issue, or else hold a national secret referendum of the rank and file of the CIO. No matter how demagogic the motives of Lewis in making these proposals might be, and Lewis is no stranger to demagogy, they deserve a serious and direst answer for the benefits of the ranks.
Both the CIO and the AFL executive councils, under the thumb of Roosevelt, went counter to the interests and views of the vast majority of organized workers in America, as emphasized again in the recent Gallup Poll on the question of labor unity. The ranks are overwhelmingly for it.
The CIO has a very simple way to assure its continued domination in the mass production industries in the event of any unity negotiations. Get a closed shop in Big Steel, in autos and elsewhere. Fighting for this demand is not something apart from unity. It is part and parcel of the trend toward unity, which is strengthened by having all labor back the steel and auto workers.
 
Short-Sighted Approach
The short-sightedness and bureaucratic approach to the labor unity question on the part of CIO leaders was expressed crudely by R.J. Thomas, president of the CIO Auto Workers: “I am not interested in the American Federation of Labor. I am willing to cooperate in avoiding jurisdictional disputes, but I am still not willing to sit down with a bunch of racketeers.”
That there are racketeers in the AFL leadership is no secret. To use this as an argument against taking steps, together with AFL representatives, is nonsense, and comes with poor grace from labor leaders who sit down like a flash with imperialist war-mongers to discuss how to keep labor’s nose to the grindstone during the war. The argument, in another form, of course, is often heard from AFL bureaucrats who “won’t sit down with communists.”
Isn’t Thomas interested in 5,000,000 organized workers who comprise the AFL? He is getting to sound like one of those diehard reactionaries in the AFL who spend a lifetime not being interested in the interests of the millions of industrial workers.
The best methods of avoiding jurisdictional disputes is not to take them up piecemeal as they arise, but for the unions to settle this question fundamentally during any unity negotiations.
As for the question of racketeers in the AFL, the CIO in a drive for labor unity would be in an excellent position to help the AFL rank and file clean out any racketeer elements.
If the CIO executive council would call for labor unity and put on the agenda as one of the points of negotiations, cleaning them out, the AFL leaders’ who cover up those elements would be unable to get away with the present disgraceful situation.
And by the way, Thomas and other CIO leaders find no difficulty whatever in sitting down with Dan Tobin, of the Teamsters Union, which has none too healthy a record, nor with William Green, AFL president, who has gone to one AFL union convention after another without lifting a finger to help oust the racketeers from power.
The needs of the working class as a whole demand a class approach to the labor unity question, not the narrow bureaucratic approach of the various cliques in the trade union leadership.
Speculation about the future course of John L. Lewis does not concern us greatly. His actions, as head of the powerful United Mine Workers Union, have considerable importance but are not decisive in this question.
Against this spurious peace plan of Roosevelt, which makes the three CIO and AFL leaders on the new six-man board his bootlicking flunkeys, the ranks of labor must continue to struggle for labor unity, for democracy in the trade unions, for organisation campaigns, and to make the rich pay for their war.
The main purpose of the new board, as openly admitted by the CIO and AFL leaders, and by Roosevelt, is to tie the labor movement more closely to the imperialist war machine.
Experience will demonstrate again that the only real weapon labor has in obtaining its rights is its own independent power and strength. And that labor unity is the way to concentrate this power and strength most effectively.
 



The ceaseless struggle of labor to defend its interests from the attacks of ihe economic royalists and their agents has reached a crucial stage this May Day, because of the extension of the Second World War to global proportions.
One year ago the union movement was celebrating its victories over Ford, symbol of the open, shop policy in America, over Bethlehem, International Harvester and other industrial barons.
Although the shadow of imperialist war loomed ominously overhead, the storm had not yet broken over these shores and the labor movement was busy consolidating organizational and economic gains.
Today the labor movement finds itself enmeshed in the deadly spider-web of war, with its very existence threatened by slow strangulation and the ever-increasing burdens placed Upon its already overloaded shoulders.
The economic royalists, masters of this powerful industrial and financial system, attack labor directly or, through congressional hatchetmen, drive for a return to the open shop everywhere, and ply their nefarious trade on a world scale which earned for them, besides fabulous profits, the odious description: “Merchants of Death.”
The chiseling on all union standards and the rising cost of living against the background of war profiteering, as well as the mounting scandals exposing the Merchants of Death, have fomented a deep resentment and uneasiness among the shop workers.
 
Industrial Barons on the March
Bitterness increased when the: industrialists utilized the “Munich Pact” agreement signed by AFL and CIO officials under government pressure, to carry on an all-out campaign against all labor rights and standards. Since the CIO and the AFL leaders gave up their strongest weapon, the right to strike, the industrial, barons have been proceeding in their drive with complete impunity.
The appeasement policy adopted at the Washington conference already has cost the shop workers a wage cut, in the form of taking away their union standards for overtime on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays.
It was this tragic consequence, hitting the pocketbooks of the workers, of the AFL and CIO appeasement policy which militant workers opposed at the auto and shipyard conferences held recently.
And for the first time at CIO conferences, direct references were made to the big salaries and expenses of the CIO and AFL bureaucrats, who suffer no personal inconvenience in wage cuts!
There is no question about it: The present appeasement policy of the trade union bureaucracy has alienated the vast majority of workers from the top leaders; and the division between militant workers defending the best interests of the union movement, and the bureaucrats, retreating ignobly before every capitalist onslaught, becomes sharper every day.
 
Role of the Stalinists
Each day finds the labor bureaucrats and the Stalinist machine clashing with the ranks in the shops. The Stalinists’ reactionary role in the labor movement is demonstrated by every action they take. It is not merely a question of their bureaucratic methods, their violation of all trade union principles of democracy, but of their functioning as stooges for the companies. They become “efficiency experts” in the same crude manner of the company efficiency experts, that, is speed-up artists.
The fact that our movement’s policies of defending the rights of labor, of attacking the war profiteers, and of exposing the Merchants of Death finds the greatest sympathy and response among the workers in the shops, accounts for the Trotskyist witch hunt the Stalinists have begun on a national scale.
As one delegate at the shipyard conference told some Stalinists: “You see a Trotskyite under your bed every night.”
For Trotskyism today is becoming synonymous with defense of labor’s rights. The fusion between the movement and the masses is becoming a reality. Nothing illustrates this more clearly than the widespread increase in the working class circulation and support for Labor Action – and the fact that the Stalinists continually seek to suppress its appearance (as well as that of other radical papers) before the workers.
In many unions in America, for the first time, the ranks, feeling both their own strength and the exploitation of the industrialists, are re-sifting and finding themselves called “Trotskyists.”
 
Militants and “Lewisism”
Since the John L. Lewis forces in the labor movement are an imposing machine, it is understandable and regrettable that many militants find themselves partly gravitating toward “Lewisism” rather than finding their way into the ranks of the movement.
But a greater drive and more activity among the workers, especially the expansion, of Labor Action, to present the views of the Workers Party, will make our movement more of a magnetic force of attraction.
Sticking to the ideals and purposes for which May Day has become an historic symbol is part of our May Day celebration, our re-dedication, to the rich tradition of this workers’ holiday, and the Stalinist mockery of May Day, serves to make clear to the workers the division between these two political tendencies.
The fact that the ranks of labor resist at every step the attacks of the bosses, and that they fight to reject the reactionary policies of the despicable turncoats who are at the top of the union movement today is the best sign on this May Day of the bright future of tomorrow.
In the present situation, and its development during the coming period, the prospects are unlimited for the movement. As always, the key question becomes one of building cadres of workers, of building the Workers Party, thoroughly imbued with the great teachings of Marxism.
 



In the multifarious activities of the labor movement during the past eight years – since industrial unionism become a living reality in the mass production industries – we have been asked one question by union militants: What is John L. Lewis going to do? This was a big question at the AFL convention in 1934 when the industrial union issue irrevocably divided the progressives and the craft union diehards. It had been the big question long before ... and ever since.
John L. Lewis has been an influential figure in the American labor movement since he assumed the presidency of the United Mine Workers in 1918. No leader, except Samuel Gompers, the father and guiding spirit of the American Federation of Labor for two decades, reached the power and stature of the “founder of the CIO.” No man in the labor movement can look back at such an amazing, stormy and rugged career as can John L. Lewis. Today, as always, the curses and the praises of John L. Lewis are heard across the land. Today, as always, he is pictured as everything from a devil to the Samson of labor, from a fascist to a Lincoln, from the man-of-tomorrow to a has-been. But let us set things in their proper proportions.
Few men in life are endowed as fully with the talents and capabilities of John L. Lewis. Even as a young coal miner before the First World War, his shrewd mind, his burly, rugged body, his roaring voice, his slugging ability, made an impression on all who chanced to meet him. Small wonder that he soon worked himself into statistician for the United Mine Workers, having already attracted the eye of Samuel Gompers, who picked him as an up-and-coming figure in the union movement.
John L. Lewis began his climb upward in an epoch of machine politics in America, an epoch well described in Lincoln Steffens’ muckraking works and his autobiography. And it was an epoch of flaming, passionate, revolutionary idealism and courage. John L. Lewis made his choice early in 1913, when he went to Akron, Ohio, during a city-wide rubber workers’ strike. The revolutionary industrial unionism preached by Bill Haywood, one-time president of the Western Federation of Miners, left no mark on the young AFL organizer, Lewis, who sought to win the embittered strikers to the conservative union. Both Lewis and the IWW lost. Akron remained open shop until 1936, when Lewis reversed himself and supported the striking rubber workers, which led to the CIO’s first major victory.
 
How Lewis Become UMWA President
Functioning as an AFL organizer, and a miners’ special representative, Lewis learned the ropes of machine politics during the First World War. The notorious Tammany Hall, Penrose and other political machines had their deadly counter-parts in the trade unions. Lewis plunged eagerly into this atmosphere like a duck into water, his abilities pushing him forward at a rapid pace. The almost unknown John L. Lewis became president of the United Mine Workers of America in 1919, without ever having been elected to a previous office by the rank and file. He had already served as acting president and was chosen to the highest post by the executive board, ahead of such ambitious and influential men as Van Bittner, his one-time tutor.
It was a good union when Lewis took office. It had over 400,000 members. In the war, the miners had distinguished themselves in bitter strikes, especially in the Alabama fields, where the union spent over $2,000,000 trying to crack the open shop. The UMWA conventions voted against compulsory military training and conscription of labor, while pledging at the same time, “unqualified support to President Wilson’s policies.” In these actions and contradictions, Lewis was just one among many. While he devoted some energy to the “war effort,” there is little doubt that much more of the abilities of the up-and-coming labor leader were spent in maneuvering for the presidency and in studying the coal mining industry until he became an acknowledged expert in the field.
In politics, the new president of the United Mine Workers was a staunch Republican. In his philosophy, a typical pragmatist, the “practical” trade union leader. Marriage to a well-read school teacher served to increase his intellectual interests. He became the best read labor leader in America, thoroughly familiar with the classics and history. His drive to power in the United Mine Workers revealed what psychologists would term “a Napoleonic complex.” It was discernible in every action of the young union leader who was convinced of his rôle as leader of men, and it was a role he immensely enjoyed. All in all, a unique, impressive and dangerous figure.
It would be impossible to find a single unionist of the day who would have mentioned Lewis in the same breath with the giants of that epoch, Gene Debs and Bill Haywood, both of whom won imperishable fame as unflinching fighters for the emancipation of the working class. The Russian revolution left a deep impression on them, and inspired countless thousands of workers in America. But to John L. Lewis it was a terrible nightmare. And he was to make an odious record in his brutal defense of “American principles” against the “Communists seeking to undermine the foundations of the government.” Lewis’ philosophy, his appeal to the employers, was this: “Grind men under the employer’s heel, and you invite communism. Give the men a square deal and you take out an insurance policy against it.” In this basic tenet Lewis has not changed. His belief in “liberal capitalism” is stronger than ever.
It took the coal crisis and the struggles of the United Mine Workers against the ravages of unemployment, low wages and insecurity to unfold the Lewis philosophy, to test the principles of unionism and politics he had learned from Samuel Gompers. Coal Age, the official magazine of the coal operators, referred to the strikes of the miners as revolutions, and to Lewis as a dictator. The 1919 strike was hardly compromised when the impact of post-war depression shook the entire union. And the 1921 strike became inevitable. The howls of the press against the UMWA were as loud as those which we heard last fall during the captive coal mine strike. Congress passed a resolution supporting President Wilson’s blast at the miners in declaring any strike “illegal.” Lewis replied exactly as he did 20 years later to Roosevelt: “Wilson is usurping powers not given him.” Federal troops and national guardsmen marched to the coal mines. But the miners struck. Lewis, however, retreated amid shouts of “capitulator.” In 1941 the coal miners struck and stayed there. Lewis stood firm. The coal strikers won!
 
A Bitter Factional Struggle
The differences between Lewis and the progressives during the 1921 strike merely marked the first major clash. A life-and-death factional struggle without parallel in labor history occupied the next ten years of the miners’ union. It was an inevitable struggle. And inevitably a bitter, cruel and ruthless struggle. For the United Mine Workers Union was born and developed in struggle. The coal barons were “uncivilized Tom Girdlers.” The strike struggles bred a type of union unmatched anywhere. Perhaps the best CIO militants today approach them. The UMWA had organized Negroes and whites together, had fought all racial discrimination. It was based on industrial unionism. It had built up a fairly democratic tradition and procedure. It was in a basic industry and the fact that its principles and policies made it a CIO “twenty years ahead of the rest of the industrial workers,” put it in direct conflict with the industrial rulers of America at all times. It was, in a sense, predestined by circumstances to be the storm center of the American labor movement.
Combine these factors with the chaotic conditions flowing from the post-war depression in the coal industry, its “overproduction,” its staggering unemployment, its marginal mines operated like feudal sweatshops, and you can understand the history of the coal miners’ struggles. Out of this atmosphere of strike and misery arose hundreds of militants determined not only to build a powerful union movement but also to build a new society, socialism, which would replace the hell of capitalism.
If all the major battles which established the CIO were put together they would perhaps begin to compare in scope and violence with the struggles of the coal miners in the post-war period. The saga of the miners’ fights are rich indeed. The Mingo County March, bloody Herrin, bloody Harlan, the anthracite strike – to mention a few. To most CIO unionists these are just names. To old-timers and coal miners they are sacred names, imperishable memories of battlefields where men fought and starved and died by the scores so that unionism might triumph! Nowadays unionism too often means only wages, hours and working conditions. For the coal miners it was a life and death question, a way of life. For a coal miner to be called a good union man was highest praise.
And when something or someone “wasn’t union,” it was just too bad.
 
Gompersism Was Not “Workable”
The craft unions comprising the main stream of the AFL during this period did not face this kind of basic conflict. Gompers’ philosophy could “work” among skilled workers whom the employers were willing, to some extent, to deal with and pay good wages to, at the expense of the unskilled masses. The Matthew Wolls, William Hutchesons and company did not face the situation that John L. Lewis met. In a major industry, in an industrial union movement, Gompersism was not “workable” if the union was to progress. It took Lewis ten years of struggle to learn this elementary fact about unionism. It partly explains why Lewis after 1934 took the road of industrial unionism in mass production industries while his AFL colleagues clung to the ghost of Gompers.
Lewis outlined his Gompers Program in the book, The Miners Fight for an American Standard. He combined the economics of Adam Smith with the trade unionism, “pure and simple,” of the father of the AFL in this tract. He scorned the theories of Karl Marx and ridiculed Marx’s followers as “revolutionary idealists, impractical visionaries.” He fought savagely against the left-wing in his union which sought to replace the credo of Gompers with the ideas that later became the foundation ideas of the CIO movement. At times Lewis fought against the coal barons who refused his co-operation, but more often than not his heaviest blows fell on the militants. As a result the union suffered more than one “Little Steel” strike fiasco and massacre.
At every turn of events opposition leaders arose by the score to oppose the policies and leadership of Lewis. They fought the man they called “Mussolini” on trade union questions, but his knowledge of the industry, his ruthless methods, his imperiousness to all criticism, blows and defeats, together with his skill in machine politics, kept him in power. The internal struggle weakened the union and its gradual decline brought fresh ammunition to the oppositionists. There was Alex Howatt, the splendid militant from Kansas, John Brophy, William Mitch, Powers Hapgood, William Turnblazer and Ray Edmundson. These and others rose to challenge Lewis and his machine. They won elections but never took office, for the ballots usually disappeared. They rallied the ranks behind them, but the conventions were packed. Progressives were slugged, or terrified, or forced to capitulate openly. In this period Lewis was described as “the King of Labor Racketeers” by Oscar Ameringer, the Adam Coaldigger of the American Guardian, and a long-time favorite weekly radical newspaper among the miners.
 
Lewis Discovers a “Communist” Plot
Lewis discovered a “Communist plot to seize the reins of government through control of the United Mine Workers.” He roared at William Z. Foster, Communist Party trade union director, sitting in the galleries at a miners’ convention, that they’d never win. What conventions! Fist fights, general melees, autocratic rulings. “May the chair state you may shout until you meet each other in hell, and he won’t change the rule,” Lewis bellowed at protesting delegates at one convention. Purge after purge followed in local unions “dominated by Moscow elements.” The triumvirate of Lewis, Murray and Kennedy ruled at all costs. But the president out-shined his collaborators: ruthless fighting ability and bureaucratic methods were two distinct characteristics of “Big Boy,” as his henchmen called him.
By 1927 the once powerful United Mine Workers, torn asunder and weakened in incessant battles with the coal operators, was but a thin shadow of the giant of 1919. The mistakes made by the left wing in the forming of the independent union, the National Miners Union, following the save-the-union campaign, saved the day for Lewis. He was to prove too strong even for the Progressive Miners of America, which was formed of a large split in Illinois. Court actions supporting the UMWA, disillusionment among the miners, division in the new union and the disintegration of the industry itself, which made a good contract almost impossible for anyone to obtain, finished off the Progressive Miners Union. Today it remains but a skeleton opposition and William Green’s voice in the coal industry.
The 1929 crash blasted away a thousand and one illusions about permanent American prosperity and the value of Adam Smith’s theories, which millions along with John L. Lewis had held. Lewis was forced to recognize the “dog eat dog” nature of capitalism and the miserable failure of his friend, Herbert Hoover, President of the United States. The coal operators had become integral parts of the steel and railroad dynasties. Compromise and cooperation wasn’t in their language, even to the savior of American principles, John L. Lewis. His “practical politics approach” had resulted in a “reward your enemies and punish your friends” policy.
These were bitter years for John L. Lewis, “full of sound and fury, signifying nothing.” Could he forget how his own union failed to support his bid to replace Gompers as president of the AFL? Or the stinging criticisms of the left wing contained in an admirable brochure entitled Misleaders of Labor, by William Z. Foster? Or the fact that his pride and joy, the United Mine Workers, was down to a miserable 60,000 members? And the AFL was lending it money. Nor could he dismiss the arrogance and contempt which the triumphant open shop coal operators hurled at him and the Miners Union!
 
“I Live for Today”
The lessons of these cruel defeats were not entirely lost on John L. Lewis. Quite the contrary! For he grudgingly admitted as much, in a half-hearted apology for his black record in the semi-official biography written by Cecil Carnes. “I don’t give a hang about what happened yesterday. I live for today and tomorrow. I will say only this: it takes every man some time to find himself in this world, to decide what he wants to do with his life. It took me longer than most.” Lewis said this in 1936, when the CIO was pushing forward. Nevertheless, the past cannot be erased from the records of labor history, nor can the character and philosophy of a man trained for twenty years in a particular way be suddenly altered.
When Philip Murray talked to him about Franklin Roosevelt, Democratic candidate for President, Lewis listened, but without great enthusiasm. However, the wave of revolt which swept the nation and became channelized into the New Deal was not overlooked by Lewis. Quickly sensing the possibilities of staging a real comeback, Lewis utilized his “support” of Roosevelt to press for the adoption of a national industrial recovery program in which unionism was to be an integral part. The working class was highly stirred and flocked into labor unions. While others faltered in the AFL, Lewis put on an organizing campaign which resulted in the return of 400,000 miners to the United Mine Workers. The master opportunist seized at every possible advantage. “The name is Lewis ... John L.” became a thundering voice of labor in Washington, where panicky industrialists and timid congressmen shuddered at the social crisis and the abyss caused by the 1929 economic crisis.
 
The Fight for Industrial Unions
The rest of the AFL leadership remained true to the ideas of Gompers. When hundreds of thousands of steel, auto and rubber workers flooded the AFL, the executive council hesitated, backwatered and finally sold them down the river in a series of fake agreements with the industries. They sought to divide the industrial workers into craft unions! Only Lewis, in the AFL hierarchy, had learned the lesson of the post-war years. If the United Mine Workers was to survive this time, it must have national labor support, a huge industrial union movement which could meet “the Mellons and the Morgans as equals.”
Would John L. Lewis, the black-hearted reactionary, support industrial unionism, the dream of the left wing? It was hardly believable. And many critical articles said so! Lewis spoke for industrial unionism in the mass production industries at the 1934 AFL convention. His resolution lost by a close vote. In 1935, Lewis crossed the Rubicon. He formed the Committee for Industrial Organization and began financing progressive movements within AFL unions in auto, steel and rubber, i.e., those which sought to establish independent international industrial unions. When the Akron rubber workers struck at Goodyear early in 1936, the CIO supported them. Industrial unionism won its first major victory!
The tide that swept the country in the form of sit-down strikes was not John L. Lewis’ doing. But he had learned enough to “tolerate” sit-down strikes, even though the press cried, in the ancient Lewis refrain, “outlaw and illegal strikes.” The United Mine Workers poured hundreds of thousands of dollars into the CIO organizing campaigns. Its union veterans became CIO directors, organizing everything they could lay their hands on, while the AFL craft unions shook in their boots and finally expelled the “insurgent CIO.” But the CIO was irrevocably on the march.
Of course, Lewis was hailed by his allies as the Samson or Lincoln of the labor movement. He was emancipating labor. His past history was glossed over, especially by that school of journalists trained in the degenerated Communist Party. Once again the Wall Street Journal, Coal Age and the New York Times warned gravely of a John L. Lewis dictatorship over industry in America. It was the period of the Roosevelt-Lewis honeymoon, when Roosevelt was denouncing the “economic royalists” and Lewis blasted the “industrial tycoons seeking to stop the wave of humanity.”
At last, however the ruthless fighting quality of John L. Lewis were turned in the right direction: against the powerful industrial rulers of America. The U.S. Steel Corp. signed an agreement with the Steel Workers Organizing Committee; auto was organized; the CIO went forward! To be sure, the CIO unions organized directly by Lewis henchmen leaned too heavily on maneuvers at the top. Organizing committees were set up in place of independent international unions, except in the auto and rubber sections. Lewis, the bureaucrat of the old days, had softened, but had not changed fundamentally.
American labor found a new and powerful personality in the long overlooked Lewis. Who could forget his trip to Detroit during the General Motors strike when he staked the future of the young CIO movement on a victory? “Let there be no moaning at the bar when I put out to sea,” he told the Washington press, revealing both his plans and his erudition. His histrionic abilities were used to full advantage. And the mighty voice theretofore used to heap scorn on the left wing now roared at the industrialists. Busily occupied with the sit-down strikes and unionization, the workers and their enemies alike failed to pay attention to the first signs of friction between Lewis and Roosevelt which developed in the General Motors strike. Roosevelt wanted the sit-down strikers ordered back to work before negotiations began. Lewis wanted assurances of an agreement. The sit-down strikers, tasting of their strength, demanded victory before returning to work.
 
The Friendship Begins to Cool Off
Roosevelt’s request had startled Lewis. After all, Lewis had obtained, support of the auto workers for Roosevelt’s re-election in 1936 by threatening to withhold organizing funds until the foundation convention of the UAW had repudiated a resolution previously passed denouncing all capitalist politicians and calling for the formation of a labor party.
In addition, Lewis had organized Labor’s Non-Partisan League, which spent over $500,000 to re-elect Roosevelt. He had supported Governor Davey in Ohio, Townsend in Indiana, Earle in Pennsylvania and other “Roosevelt men.” While Lewis felt that the League was a sort of left wing in the Democratic Party, his reliance on the bankrupt politicians was very strong. When the heat was turned on during the Little Steel strike, each of these “friends of labor” double-crossed Lewis, and the Little Steel strike was turned into the first major defeat of the CIO. The climax came at Chicago in the form of the Memorial Day Massacre. Roosevelt’s rejection of a plea for support from Lewis was couched in the following nonchalant declaration: “A plague on both your houses.” Lewis grumbled about ingratitude; their friendship cooled.
The UMWA executive committee even passed a resolution condemning the Administration without mentioning Roosevelt by name. Relations were not improved when the President sought to prevent the miners from striking to win a genuine national agreement in 1939, one which would compel the coal operators in the South and other “feudal” regions to deal with the union. At that time, the breach between Roosevelt and Lewis was very noticeable and Lewis hinted broadly that he would support a Republican in 1940 against Roosevelt. But few CIO unionists believed that the collision would lead to an irreparable break.
In each of the issues around which the White House and Lewis clashed, Lewis stood squarely on union rights and for the protection of the best interests of the CIO. However, his Stalinist allies were so busy plying the theory and practice of the Popular Front that the issues became blurred to the CIO ranks. Lewis’ previous praise for FDR placed him in an awkward position to open a struggle against him within the labor movement. Lewis, the union leader, had learned enough to stubbornly defend the union movement. Lewis, the politician, had no answer. His dilemma was painfully evident.
The transformation of the New Deal into the War Deal intensified the antagonism between Lewis, seeking to safeguard the CIO, and Roosevelt, determined to bring the union movement into the war machine. Concessions to labor became few and finally ceased. Time and again, Lewis lashed out at Roosevelt, but his attacks missed fire. His bureaucratic approach in building the CIO, his failure to educate the union ranks, his opportunism in support of Roosevelt, backfired. The question of whether Roosevelt or Lewis would dominate the top leadership of the CIO became more acute. Lewis, remembering the post-war period, feared the foreign policies of Roosevelt, which he knew meant involvement in the Second World War. For this reason Lewis began a campaign “against the statesmen who spend nights dreaming of foreign adventures instead of solving problems at home.” Lewis had in mind, for example, the problem of unemployment.
Lewis’ deal with the Stalinists boomeranged. In 1939 and 1940, during the period of the Stalin-Hitler pact, the Stalinists had a line which coincided with Lewis’, thereby postponing his previous plan to purge them. But the Hitler attack on Russia brought about another switch in their line. They began to wave a patriotic flag and denounced their “leader” in the American labor movement.
 
Reason for Lewis’ Defeat
The speeches of John L. Lewis during the pre-1940 election period indicated that he was considering two possibilities: formation of a third party or support of a Republican candidate. His blasts at poll-tax politicians became sharper. He addressed the Townsend Old Age Pension convention, bidding for their support and making a private deal with its leaders. And he sought the backing of the auto workers union at its St. Louis convention by a belligerent speech against conscription and the follies of war. His own waverings, his failure to make a class appeal directly and openly to the CIO, and the labyrinth of capitalist politics to which he had tied the CIO previously, worked to defeat him. He fumbled about politically at a time when a clear-cut decision and action for a labor party was vital.
Caught in this dilemma, Lewis turned a somersault and endorsed Wendell Willkie – a major blunder! For, while the CIO ranks were restless and uneasy about the Roosevelt Administration, they could never be sold on the party of Herbert Hoover. The 1940 elections clearly revealed the limits of Lewis’ development during the CIO days. He was bound hand and foot to bourgeois politics. His beliefs in the social system of capitalism blinded him to the political realities and requirements of the day. The “liberalization” of John L. was a very limited one, indeed.
This tragic error cost Lewis the leadership of the CIO. He gambled for it during the 1940 elections and he accepted the loss. (In the old days he would have slugged his way into retaining his hold over the CIO organization and could have successfully done so at the 1940 CIO convention.) The reign of John L. Lewis as undisputed director of the CIO was over. Phillip Murray, the Roosevelt man and colleague of Lewis, replaced him as president of the CIO. Of course, the superficial critics of Lewis and the war-mongering elements saw this defeat as the end of the career of the founder of the CIO. Too soon, however, much too soon! They forgot that Lewis had established a powerful base in his own union, partly because the dictatorial constitution of other days gave him vast powers and partly because the United Mine Workers had obtained good contracts for its members. The union had over 600,000 members covered by nation-wide agreements, including the Harlan and Alabama areas. Wage rates were higher than ever before, no wage differentials existed between the Northern and Southern areas, safety standards and other protections were won for the coal diggers. The UMWA had the best contracts in America, embracing closed shop agreements.
The first major test for John L. Lewis after his resignation as CIO president and removal as its policy-maker was the captive coal mine strike of autumn 1940. Here he demonstrated that he stood four-square on the program of the early militant CIO, while other CIO leaders hesitated or retreated before the anti-labor offensive which developed with the war drive. The undisguised threats of the Roosevelt Administration panicked the rest of the CIO leadership, but they were contemptuously ignored by Lewis. “You can’t dig coal with bayonets,” he said, taking a leaf from the left wing in the 1919 strike, who were faced with federal troops. The miners stood with their president against the White House on this issue. As long as Lewis defends the rights of the UMWA, his regime is reasonably secure.
The outbreak of the war served, among other things, to demonstrate once more the limitation of Lewis. He had successfully espoused the industrial union movement ideal of Gene Debs and Bill Haywood. But he completely lacked their political understanding, their irreconcilable hatred of the system oi capitalism. Quietly and without fanfare, Lewis passed up an opportunity to earn himself an unforgettable and historic place among working class leaders. Lewis stopped at the point of “isolationist” fear and doubts about the imperialist war!
This typically opportunist action of John L. Lewis, however did not serve to earn him peace or friendship at the White House, in which, by the way, he is not greatly interested. Total war demands total support from a key labor figure like Lewis. This is extremely unlikely since Lewis has indicated both in his pre-war and since our entrance that he doubts very much the value and purpose of the present imperialist struggle, and that he is preparing for the post-war period. In his St. Louis speech, Lewis showed that he had a fair glimpse of what a post-war chaos loomed before America. And Lewis has not given up his ambitions to lead 30,000,000 organized workers and perhaps – it is a prospect – find himself in the Presidency of the United States. How Lewis obtained the “Presidency buy” is revealingly told in Mr. Carnes’ book, following his lengthy interviews with the UMWA president in 1936.
His “war of nerves” in the CIO today is part of that grand strategy. Unlike other CIO leaders, Lewis has not come out for surrendering union overtime standards. He views this question, and others, with an eye to post-war reactions of the workers. His drive to organize the dairy farmers is another important tactic in this long range campaign. Opportunist and pragmatist to the core, Lewis will try to utilize every situation and event to serve his general aims. Perhaps the 1944 elections will be ripe for his type of a “third party.” Or, maybe another deal will be possible! Lewis doesn’t know which it might be. (Our hope is that the break from the two major parties occurs, because this would provide the most fertile field for agitation for an independent labor party.) A major consideration in Lewis’ political strategy is the recovery of power and influence in the labor movement. (The growing antagonism between elementary CIO aims and the Roosevelt Administration policies, such as the “freeze wages” issue, works well with Lewis’ plans.) Or perhaps another plunge into building an independent labor movement out of the rapidly growing District 50 of the UMWA. Lewis has not settled this question, since he awaits circumstances and their effects, and that is why prognostication on this score is purely journalistic speculation. But in all these maneuvers and activities, one thing stands out clearly: Lewis is building his fences everywhere, politically and organizationally.
 
A Powerful Factor for 1944
Unless unforeseen circumstances intervene, John L. Lewis is going to be a powerful factor in 1944 politics, too powerful to dismiss or ignore. One of his most bitter critics, a very astute Washington labor journalist, recently remarked: “Lewis is the only smart man in Washington. He knows what he wants, and he’s got them all scared.” His admonitions not to believe the junk he was writing about Lewis for an anti-Lewis paper were likewise revealing and should serve to warn those people who tend to believe the headlines of today’s heavily censored and biased press. Is it any wonder that Washington suffers a bad case of “Lewis jitters”? Or that the miserable mediocrities in the CIO leadership fear him? It took all of Roosevelt’s prestige and power to save them when Lewis recently pulled a masterful stroke in calling for labor unity between the CIO and AFL. The only CIO leader somewhat approximating Lewis in ability is his one-time associate, Phil Murray, whose gyrations these days between the Stalinists, Roosevelt, and his old ties doom him to the rôle of a Hamlet. By the time this article appears, Murray’s future will be quite clearly indicated in the results of the convention of the Steel Workers Organizing Committee.
Each time the stage of world history turns, Lewis has been cast in a different light! In the period of world revolutionary struggles, he was a black shadow. In the period of dark reaction, his insistence on industrial unionism in open shop America, together with his limited personal progress, gave him the spotlight in the progressive wing of the labor movement. Faced with a basic choice between class politics and class collaborationist policies, Lewis flopped badly. When the entire labor bureaucracy capitulated completely before the war drive, Lewis cautiously distinguished himself from the others by holding to the aims of the early CIO. His stature as a trade unionist grew. In politics, his limitations are those of the whole CIO. For “CIOism” at its best can no more solve the historic tasks of the working class than Gompersism could in its heyday. Fortunately, “CIOism” provides the working class with a much stronger base of operation. Fascism can never triumph in America while labor’s millions effectively protect their industrial unions.
 
Signposts of the Future
What the future holds in store for John L. Lewis depends primarily on the turn of world events. A long war, unbroken by revolutionary struggles, will tend to increase his power and influence as long as he continues on the path of defending, in his own way to be sure, the UMWA and the labor movement from strangulation. His unique abilities and his strength in the UMWA assure him of a constantly important rôle. His policies, irrespective of subjective desires, tend to keep the sparks of class struggle alive today. In his lifetime Lewis’ power rested on his base in the working class. That is why, incidentally, his “isolationism” has a different content than that of capitalist politicians like Wheeler. It rests pn a different class base. Theirs is the bewilderment of the petty bourgeoisie, fearful of world events, containing latent fascist tendencies. Lewis’ views reflect the suspicions, distrust and fears of the workers in the present world struggle, which take on an “isolationist” character.
Tomorrow, as yesterday, Lewis must depend on the organized labor movement becoming stronger in order that he may remain a power. Anyone studying the man’s history or having had personal experiences with him cannot doubt that in the stormy times ahead, Lewis is easily capable of holding his own against his present adversaries. The man is here to stay, in influence and power, until the day when the workers themselves tackle the main job. In that epoch Lewis will be finished, for nothing in his character, ideas or career suggest that he is capable of a fundamental change.
Meanwhile, “Big Boy is on the march again,” as his henchmen say. “And he gets what he goes after,” they add, thereby explaining, among other things, why Lewis keeps a powerful machine around him. (It is not solely jobs, but the feeling that Lewis is THE leader that keeps his machine largely intact.) Where the march will lead, we must repeat, depends on the roads that world developments open up. And which road Lewis will take is predetermined by the man’s limited character, ideas and program, as here outlined.
 



President Roosevelt intervened directly in the conference of shipyard workers and employers to demand that the contract signed under the stabilization agreement be violated in favor of the industrialists, and labor take a wage cut!
It was a devastating example of what Roosevelt’s seven-point program means in practice to the union movement!
Under the agreement signed one year ago, the base rate for skilled mechanics is $1.12 an hour in all four zones except the gulf zone, where it was set at $1.07 an hour.
Increases in the cost of living, as reported by the Department of Labor, would bring the base rate on the Gulf Coast to about $1.34 and on the Pacific Coast to about $1.27.
That is, if labor is to keep the same real wage level that it had one years ago, these increases in wages per hour are needed.
There is no question of a general wage increase. That is, of labor getting more real wages than a year ago! No question of labor getting part of the fabulous profits which the shipyard owners are enjoying.
If labor doesn’t get this hourly increase to meet the higher cost of living, the shipyard workers are taking a wage cut!
The President presented his demands in a telegram to the stabilization conference which has been deadlocked for two weeks over this problem.
All that the unions have asked is that real wages be kept at the same level. And Roosevelt insisted that this was “irreconcilable with the national policy to control the cost of living.” But his “controlling” is a controlling downward, while Bethlehem and the other major shipyards continue to hold the fabulous profits they reaped during the past two years from war contracts, and which they are still taking in!
Instead of the war profiteers and the industrialists in general being squeezed hard, the squeeze is being put oh the union movement, which already has sacrificed many vital gains and standards and rights.
The action of President Roosevelt is a precedent for all the CIO negotiations with employers.
If the CIO permits it – and Philip Murray is wavering all over the lot, along with other CIO leaders – the demands of the auto and steel workers to obtain a $1.00 a day increase to meet the higher cost of living are also sunk.
Another national wage cut for all important CIO unions looms as a result of this action of President Roosevelt.
The policy of “letting the poor pay for the war” will win a major battle unless the CIO rejects the Roosevelt demands.
 



Two important symptoms of the growing resentment among rank and file workers against the “appeasement of big business” policies of the top CIO leaders appeared this week.
The auto workers and shipyard workers unions called special conventions to take up the proposal adopted by the national CIO executive board to give up Sunday double-time pay.
Although the ostensible issue before these conventions is the overtime question, the fact is that the ranks of labor are quite as worried about the continual retreat of the CIO top leadership each time the industrial barons or their congressional spokesmen crack the whip as they are about the Sunday overtime problem.
Since Pearl Harbor the unions have relinquished the right to strike and their two demands for a union shop and a dollar a day wage increase have been stalled indefinitely. But big business has made no concessions. In fact, it keeps pressing for labor to make more and more sacrifices while it keeps raking in the profits.
Each time labor retreats the bosses demand another concession. And the growing realization that “you can’t do business with big business,” that appeasement doesn’t pay, is what is worrying the ranks of labor.
The crucial question before these two CIO conventions is to turn the ignoble retreat of the CIO leaders into a general offensive against the war profiteers.
The auto workers union should point out that General Motors, and not the auto workers union, made $200,000,000 profit last year.
The question of who benefits by giving up of Sunday double time has to be answered, too. The soldiers on the front lines aren’t going to get that money. The CIO workers would be glad to give it to them directly, if they could. Nor will the unemployed auto workers benefit.
Only General Motors will benefit. It will make more profit. Just as Bethlehem Steel will benefit in the shipyards. For the bosses will have to pay less wages and thus make more profits. Meanwhile labor would be taking a wage cut at a time when the cost of living is rapidly rising.
Business Week magazine, the mouthpiece of the industrialists, points put this week that the overtime issue is “just the beginning.” They point out, “it is merely a token move toward settlement of the real issue on labor.”
For after labor retreats on this, if it does, it will be asked to give up all wage demands.
Although the action of the CIO leaders in calling special conventions was done because of their fear of rank and file reactions against shoving an appeasement policy down their throats, a good precedent was established in calling union, conventions for consideration of crucial issues.
But that is not enough. In the past the CIO auto workers union realized that in order to have a truly democratic vote on vital questions a referendum of the entire union membership was necessary.
For example, while the St. Louis convention of the auto workers union in 1940 voted to assess each member one dollar for special organization work, the convention voted to submit its recommendation to a national referendum.
The convention clarified the issue. The referendum decided it. The overtime question in all CIO unions is certainly of vital importance and deserves the same careful consideration.
Unity of the CIO can be achieved only by solidarity behind a program adopted democratically, with the approval of the ranks.
The CIO ranks must, to safeguard themselves and their splendid unions, repudiate the appeasement policies of the present leadership. They must turn the fire on the war profiteers. And they must rally the whole labor movement, on these issues through democratic action within, the unions.
 



Revelations of the sinister dealings of the du Pont family’s Remington Arms Corp. with Hitler and his financial masters, the I.G. Farben Co., come as a fitting climax to the long and odious record of this gang of economic royalists in their drive for profits and power in America.
And,the grave indictment against their cartel agreements, through Remington Arms Corp., with I.G. Farben, put them high on the list of this war’s “Merchants of Death.”
Only their vast power and influence prevent the outbreak of a national scandal of major political proportions.
This is what the du Ponts have been doing, as summarized in the conservative paper, the New York Sun:

Gave a German company access to military information, through Remington Arms royalty payments to the German company.
 
Prevented sales of tetracene-primed ammunition to the British Purchasing Commission until very recently.
 
Allowed a German company to collect royalty on ammunition sold to the United States Army!

What do you think Congress is going to do about it? Nothing. It’s too busy attacking labor on the home front.
The record of the du Ponts in building their billion dollar empire out of blood profits in the First World War is public, and Congress hasn’t touched them.
In the First World War the du Pont fortune rose from $74,000,000 to $329,121,608, according to Ferdinand Lundberg, in his book, America’s Sixty Families, exposing the [real] rulers of America.
 
War Dividends Skyrocketed
The du Ponts’ war [dividend] equaled 458 per cent on [the] value of the original stock [in the] company!
The du Ponts were given [sum illegible] to build a nitrate [plant on a] cost-plus basis; after the [war the] plant was sold to the [National Industrial] Corp. for $3,500,000.
“Therefore the plants built [by the] du Ponts,” said the Graham investigating committee, “had been paid for out of the profits of contracts made with the Allied nations before we entered the war.” Besides, they made a profit of 33 per cent on sales!
Then the du Ponts extended their octopus grip into control of General Motors and the United States Rubber Co.
While plying their nefarious trade they built up political fences, which have given them full protection to date.
“In a broad and very real sense the du Ponts own the whole state of Delaware and parts of adjoining Pennsylvania. Delaware itself is the private fief of the du Ponts, who constructed its schools and roads, collect its taxes – Pierre du Pont is the Delaware tax commissioner for the fourth term at this writing – and, in general, supervise every detail of Delaware life!” (Lundberg’s book.)
Is it a wonder that the congressmen and senators from Delaware are mouthpieces of these Merchants of Death?
Is it a wonder that the du Pont plants are open shop? And that the people don’t know the facts, when the schools are run by these vultures of society?
 
Capone a Mere Piker
Al Capone ran a minor racket compared to the du Pont clan.
Having industrial power and political influence, and driven by an insatiable appetite for profits, the du Ponts smashed, their way into the top ruling circle of America’s Sixty families.
They organized the notorious “Liberty League” in the 1936 elections to seek absolute control of America’s political destinies.
They paid professional strikebreakers to devise arid use the deadly “Mohawk Valley formula” to smash the strike at Remington plants.
And they expanded their empire into a world domain which they shared with the I.G. Farben Co. in the vital field of war chemicals.
They own all the big newspapers in Delaware. They are powerful in Detroit, New York and Washington. What sacrifice are they making in the present war? None! Instead they are getting away with murder when it comes to war profiteering, from the deals both at home and with Nazi Germany!
 
The du Pont Empire
These vultures live well and untouched during wartime on the spoils of their industrial enterprises and dirty dealings. A billion dollar fortune. A vast industrial empire. And a state as private property to boot!
“Near the environs of Wilmington, Del., there are precisely two dozen du Pont estates, four of which are of the first magnitude.
“There is, for example, Winterthur, the ducal 150 room residence of the Henry F. du Ponts, boasting 40 bedrooms, each with a radio complete, each replete with costly antiques; the cost of the building alone was $2,000,000, and including the grounds, trappings, furniture and fixtures, the cost of the whole establishment easily touches 110,000,000,” Lundberg writes!
The Longwood residence of Pierre du Pont is worth $15,000,000. William du Pont has two imperial palaces. These are just a few examples! And we haven’t mentioned the yachts, the planes, the private trains, city apartments, etc., which these vultures use as luxurious nests in which to gorge their war profits.
Instead of fighting against this fabulous empire and its rulers, the congressmen are busy chiseling the overburdened workers in the plants ... asking THEM to sacrifice.
And the miserable leaders of the CIO and the AFL devote their main efforts to get labor to sacrifice some more, while the du Ponts, the Rockefellers and the Morgans live in a style and grandeur and make profits such as the world has never seen before. And this during a time when hundreds of thousands of workers and youth in the army are sacrificing their lives and the men in the plants are toiling.
Perhaps this presentation of facts will indicate why we think that Labor Action has a correct program when we ask for: the conscription of the war industries run by the du Ponts and putting them under workers’ control.
Workers’ control of production would not bring deals with Hitler and his agents, or blood profits while the world suffers in the agony of war!
After the exposé of the du Ponts and other capitalists in the First World War, the soldiers and union workers vowed: “Never again.” For they suffered and died in vain.
Expropriate the Merchants of Death!
Change the system that breeds these vultures of mankind!
 



In that popular Dr. Kildaire movie series, Lew Ayres, Hollywood star, became the symbol of a kind of doctor of which this world needs many more: one who fights incessantly against ignorance, prejudice, conservatism and the other opponents of human progress in the field of medicine.
Dr. Kildaire always got in hot water with the “powers-that-be” by acting according to his burning faith in justice, truth and the common people.
Unlike a vast herd of Hollywood stars, Lew Ayres did not separate his personal life and convictions from the ideas and roles he portrayed on the screen.
Ayres achieved great recognition for his appearance as a young soldier in that brilliant anti-war movie, All Quiet on the Western Front.
It was this movie, he told a draft board last week, that gave him an unshakable conviction that all wars were futile. And that is why he expressed opposition to the present World War and why he was classified as a conscientious objector.
The significance of this bold stand far outweighs the futile method by which Ayres sought to oppose the present world slaughter.
Like many other movie actors, Ayres could have obtained a soft post in the Army, traveling around the country, and being lionized by café society. It was the easy road.
 
Ayres Takes the Hard Read
Instead, Ayres, took the hard road, filled with curses and slanders; he sacrificed his personal career in order to be true to his convictions. This was the action of a brave man.
His action was the first rift in the propaganda capital of America, Hollywood. It was in the best tradition of artists and actors of other trying times, who sought to place themselves on the side of suffering humanity.
Of course, Ayres will be hounded and cursed, especially in Hollywood, by those who know better, by those whose guilty consciences are irritated by the example of an honest man.
 
Muni and Douglas
Not so long ago, Paul Muni, a notable actor, appeared in the splendid production, The Life of Emile Zola, which exposed, the Dreyfuss frame-up that rocked France. But Muni was afraid to speak up against the equally infamous Moscow Trials because of the threats and power of the Stalinist machine.
And Melvyn Douglas, to take another example, obtained a reputation as a friend of the “oakies” and of “unpopular” causes by his activities. Yet, recently he refused to voice his real opinion of the Minneapolis frame-up trials, although his organization, the American Civil Liberties Union, denounced the verdict against the Minneapolis Trotskyists.
There are many other examples of the cowardice and fear on the part of the Hollywood crowd. It is precisely because Lew Ayres rose above this putrifying atmosphere that his action is symbolic.
We hold no brief for conscientious objectors. Their philosophy is as futile a way of struggle as, the very imperialist slaughter they seek to resist. Ours is a fighting creed, provided there is something worth fighting for, as our war for labor and democratic rights testifies.
We do not expect the bewildered masses, fed with lies and other propaganda, to come directly to a clear-cut program which offers them a real way out of their toil and troubles and miseries. But we welcome each manifestation of the break of dawn.
And the Lew Ayres’ action was the first national symptom. In its own way it is interlinked with the struggle labor is making to preserve itself from the would-be Hitlers of of America.
There will be many more “Lew Ayres.” Men who sacrifice career and life in the struggle for humanity, each in his own way.
And when these brave men join together behind a program of socialism, the dawn of a new world will be at hand.
 



From the Land of the Silent People
by Robert St. John
Doubleday, Doran & Co., New York. 353 pages, $3.00
This is a good book, well worth reading. The author makes no pretentious literary claims but his work will be read and remembered long after many of the more popular best sellers in the same field are on the junk heap, where they properly belong. For Robert St. John has written an absorbing and imperishable story, not so much of his own personal experiences in the Balkans, but rather of the fall of Yugoslavia and Greece before the Nazi juggernaut.
This “personal adventure” story contains political dynamite. It contains an overwhelming array of facts largely hidden or censored by the press and the military about Yugoslavia’s sudden turn-about in realpolitik, and its primitive resistance to the Nazi war machine. The contrast between what the newspapers published about Yugoslavia’s struggle and what happened is startling even at this late date. The tragedy of the Serb and Greek peoples, the terrifying Nazi ruthlessness and wantonness, exemplified in the destruction of Belgrade, the collapse of Greece, the true facts on Crete; these and other events and factors, all an important part of the pattern of World Imperialist War II, are described simply and effectively by a first-class reporter.
St. John, an American correspondent stationed in Belgrade, tells enough to open one’s eyes about the nature of the present world struggle, but a special foreword hints that even this book has pulled its punches to some extent. “If I were on somebody’s payroll in Berlin I could tell you things that would either make you hate the British or make you say I was on somebody’s payroll in Berlin. If I were on somebody’s payroll in London I could tell you things that either would make you hate the Germans, or make you say I was on somebody’s payroll in London,” St. John declares. “And it would all be truth, either way. Part of the truth, anyway,” he adds.
The reason for this unusually candid foreword – in a war correspondent – becomes clear in the reading of his book. The Nazi technique of propaganda, “Britain is ready to fight to the last drop of anybody else’s blood,” obtains a partial factual basis in St. John’s revelations on the Balkan situation.
British propagandists also find fertile ground for their accusations of Nazi terror. St. John’s attitude appears to be, “they’re both telling the truth about the other, the liars!”
 
A War of Deception
Quite a point is made by St. John on the way the British duped the Serbs into thinking that a couple hundred thousand British soldiers would help them resist a Nazi invasion. He describes in detail the not-so-clever technique of the British in planting this rumor about their troops. And about the total ignorance of the Serbian population either about the military or political situation, since a ruthless and complete censorship prevailed. The Serbs had only their traditional, fierce, personal courage and pride and an “ox-cart army” as St. John says, to cope with an enemy whose modernized war machine was completely unknown and unheard of to the Serbian masses. Nor did the people have a war aim. In the light of all the facts brought out by St. John, the present guerrilla fighting in Yugoslavia today becomes an amazing example of dauntless spirit and heroism, even more so than that of the Russian guerrillas. (How utterly tragic that such a magnificent resistance is subordinated to one of the imperialist camps, rather than in the struggle for the liberation of all mankind.)
After living through the horror of the devastation of Belgrade, an undefended city filled with Serbian workers and peasants (as usual, the rich folk got away), St. John made his way to Sarajevo, where, by the way, he was able to try to think a little about this war, and about which he expresses his own views.
“Maybe you can reconcile international politics and Christianity. But as I lay there in a stolen bed in the Europa Hotel in Sarajevo, which was soon to be obliterated by bombs on Easter Sunday, I couldn’t make sense out of it. I wondered where God was, anyway. I wondered how Christians on both sides – because there are Christians on both sides – reconciled these things.” The answer, of course, is that they don’t. Nor does the Church intend to. For that would be getting on “dangerous ground.”
St. John recalls his conversations with young Nazi officers, indicating again the fear the German people have of another Versailles, and the arguments of Englishmen in opposition.
“They were also fighting a holy crusade. Both sides called it a holy crusade, just like the last time. The Englishmen said they were fighting this time for the liberty of individuals, for peace in Europe, for freedom of the little nations, for democracy.”
“Then I remembered how another Englishman, James Hilton, had written a little book just a couple of years ago in which he said you can never fight a war to make the world safe for democracy, because all wars kill democracy, and you can’t fight a war to end all wars, because each war begets a new one. Only that book wasn’t as popular as Good-Bye, Mister Chips, because – well, because we were all about to fight another war for democracy and peace.”
Unfortunately, St. John stops here. He doesn’t look into the social and economic structure of the world today for a basic answer to his question of WHY?
 
Who Pays for the War?
Let us quote you one of the many descriptions of the war with which St. John packs this book:
No one agreed about how many people the German bombers killed in Patras, but they surely did a job. A Greek hospital ship with tremendous red crosses painted all over its sides got a direct hit. It was listing badly and before long would go to the bottom. Someone said it was the last hospital ship the Greeks had. The rest were already at the bottom, some of them still weighed down with the bodies of their wounded passengers who hadn’t a chance when the planes came over. The hospital ship in Patras harbor had been full of wounded too ... But the worse job the planes did was on hundreds of refugees ... they flocked down to the water front ... it was a well organized exodus ... They were going away in flat bottomed barges towed by a large ship ... They were ready to shove off when the planes came.
Of course it was a stupid mistake. They never should have tried to get away in the daylight. Some of them managed to hide between the blocks of concrete on the quay, but most of them just huddled down on the barges, burying their heads in the blankets and mattresses and tin kettles and baby cribs and all the other stuff they wanted so much to save. They tried to play ostrich, but bullets from a machine gun in an airplane can hit people just as well and kill them just as dead even if their heads are buried. That was what happened. The planes dropped some bombs and then they used machine guns.
 
The Soldiers Are Thinking
By now everyone is acquainted with the feelings of the Australian soldiers who were sacrificed in Greece and Crete. There is one slant on them, however, which St. John reveals which is illuminating.
The Anzacs lay around the decks those two days and two nights reading books they had stored away in their knapsacks. It was interesting to circle around and see what entertained them. Here and there a boy had a bible. Others, who had lived through more adventure in the last few weeks than most novelists had ever seen, were reading Sabatini adventure stories. But a lot of them had their noses in serious books. One spent all his time with Propaganda for War, by an American college professor. It was a book that a British censor had once confiscated from my luggage. Another was passing Undertones of War around among his friends. A lot of them were thinking and talking about the war and what it meant and what we’re really fighting for and what kind of a world we ought to try to create after it’s all over. That amazed us. Soldiers on the front line aren’t supposed to do much thinking. But we realized now that on both sides common ordinary soldiers were trying to think the thing out. And some of them were having their troubles reconciling this and that.
The book serves a good purpose because it helps dispel many illusions prevalent today about the war, the soldiers and the peoples who are bearing its burdens. Indirectly, it is a real indictment not merely against the press which distorts the news of the war, and the censors who contribute heavily to the distortion by their omissions, but also against the world system that has plunged mankind into the present holocaust.
 



Even though it was sugar-coated and marked with a fancy label, “Victory Through Equality of Sacrifice,’’ many delegates or the CIO Auto Workers emergency conference found the recommendations of the executive board a bitter pill to swallow!
In proposing that the union give up its present overtime standards for Saturday, Sunday and holiday work, in reaffirming its relinquishing of strikes, in placing all disputes to mediation or arbitration, the executive board statement declared: “To the above contributions we commit ourselves without conditions.”
That is, no matter what the auto barons do or don’t do, the union leadership insisted that labor sacrifice some more of its gains. And this is what stuck in the throats of many delegates and is burning up the men in the shops.
“The story is that thousands of war workers here, as represented by the men who came out of the shops to attend this convention, are in no mood for one-sided sacrifices. They don’t like being called nasty names by the bank-president congressmen, profit-hoarding industrialists and well-paid editorial writers,” is the way PM’s correspondent described it.
“They feel it is high time for Congress and industry to start practicing ‘equality of sacrifice.’ If this new concession is just greeted by demands for more, they will get fighting mad,” he added.
The stormy six-hour debate, which the Daily Worker’s correspondent described as “the tensest as any witnessed at labor conventions in years,” ended when the combined efforts of the entire top leadership of the union and President Roosevelt’s direct intervention swung a big majority behind the proposals of the executive board.
But even these pro-UAW leadership correspondents pointed out, “the sentiment ... was far more evenly divided than the final balloting showed.”
This is extremely significant since the conference could not reflect the views of the men in the shop as well as a convention, for the executive boards and bargaining committees of local unions attended the sessions in a body, and no elections were held in many locals!
“The minor functionaries, who deal daily with the gripes and uncertainties and resentments of the rank and file, were less disposed to accept unconditional abandonment of double Sunday pay,” the PM correspondent wrote.
Since the decisions of this conference are subject to ratification by the locals, it is by no means certain that the retreat of the union leaders will be backed by the ranks of labor who are getting tired of an appeasement policy.
The ten-point program submitted to the “President and the Congress of the United States for adoption,” is contained below.
Before analyzing it, which will be done more thoroughly in subsequent issues of Labor Action, we would like to make a general point: It is a “watered down” version of the Murray plan, whose three basic objectives were along the lines of this ten-point program!
And what happened to the Murray plan? Has the CIO dropped it?
Another question: How do the auto workers’ leaders propose to carry out this plan? By retreating some more on every issue?
Do the Auto Workers Union leaders expect to kid anyone into thinking that any plan proposed by labor, whether it is good or bad, will stand a chance in a Congress packed with poll-tax politicians?
A union leadership which failed so miserably to give labor constructive and far-sighted direction, which retreats ignobly before every attack of the labor-baiters, is hardly one which will struggle effectively for any program adopted by the Auto Workers Union.
Fresh leadership in the unions and a new kind of congressman, workers’ representatives chosen to speak fpr the men in the plants as labor congressmen, are an indispensable prerequiste to carry out a militant program that safeguards labor’s interests in the war and afterward! Or to carry out the good features of the ten-point program submitted to the Auto Workers Union.
The UAW ten-point program follows:

End all war profiteering.
No luxuries in wartime; no war millionaires.
Stop rising costs; prevent inflation.
Rationing of all food, clothing, housing and other necessities.
Adjustment of wages to meet increased living costs.
Security for dependants of men and women in the armed services.
Moratorium on debts.
Labor’s contribution to production.
Post-war planning.
Upon the acceptance and adoption of the foregoing measures, we agree that all wages for time over 40 hours shall be paid in the form of non-negotiable Special Defense Bonds.






Pros and Cons on UAW Confab




PRO ―
“The United Automobile, Aircraft and Agricultural Implement Workers of America (UAW-CIO), its membership and officers, subscribe to the proposition that the most important task facing America today is the winning of the war. Everything else is secondary!” – R.T. Thomas, president.
“Are you going to tell the President of the United States to go to hell?” – Richard T. Frankensteen, executive board member.
“What we need is more and greater national unity.” – Nat Ganley, business agent, Local 157, and Stalinist hatchetman,
“Labor will not rise to its responsibility unless it can life itself up from its own immediate problems.” – Victor Reuther, of the Reuther family.


 


CON ―
“We’re not convinced that giving ip the double time is vital to winning the war. Labor is making sacrifices everywhere – we gave np the right to strike, our brothers and sons are dying in the trenches. Can anyone show any signs that the men who sign pay checks have made one sacrifice!” – Don McGill, Buick Local of Flint
“These men are deliberately misleading us – Congress won’t treat us any better, not matter what we give up.” – Arthur Shipley, Dodge Local delegate.
“Many of our members are fighting abroad. We must protect their rights at home. On the West Coast we have declared our willingness to work for just living expenses if management gives up profits. But they won’t give up any of their profits.” – Louis Soccone, General Motors Local, Los Angeles.



 



NEW YORK CITY – Fearing the beneficial effects of a nation-wide farmers organization tied up directly with and working as part of the labor movement, the big monopolists through their newspapers and stooge organizations have begun a vicious attack on the organization efforts of the Dairy Farmers Union, an affiliate of the United Mine Workers of America.
The New York Times indicated with virtual horror that when the union organized and put a label on milk being delivered, “the label would signify that the milk had been produced by a union farmer, handled exclusively by union labor at the receiving and pasteurizing plants, and delivered by a union driver!”
And, to add to this terrible – for the bosses – picture, the Dairy Farmers Union would seek a closed shop! In fact, in Flint, Mich., “it is doing so!
Is it any wonder that the old-line, decrepit farmers’ associations, got together and formed, with the blessings of the big milk companies, like Borden’s, a “Free Farmers” group to combat the CIO union in this field.
“This country cannot exist as a democracy under a universal closed shop,” declared James A. McConnell, general manager of the Grange League Federation, and a director of Free Farmers, in a blast against the Dairy Farmers Union.
To which Holland R. Foster, director of the Dairy Farmers Union, properly pointed out that the closed shop principle had been brought into the milkshed many years ago by organizations like the Dairymen’s League Association, one of the groups affiliated with the Free Farmers!
Foster added:
“If you don’t sign their contract you don’t belong. If you don’t belong you can’t sell them your milk. These people, who have had a closed shop for years, are crying to high heaven tonight against a possible closed union shop. That’s hypocrisy.”
For years the powerful milk companies like Sheffield’s and Borden’s have played off the farmers’ associations against the union movement over the question of prices, seeking always to keep the workers and the farmers divided – and fighting each other.
 
Labor-Farmer Unity
In a few notable exceptions like in Minnesota and Ohio during recent years, either AFL or CIO unions have been able to make a united front with farmers’ organizations to fight against their common enemy, the milk trust, which is almost as large and powerful as the major industrial combines.
The skepticism that greeted the announcement by John L. Lewis that the United Mine Workers of America was going to undertake to help the farmers form a genuine organization affiliated directly to the labor movement has changed to alarm on the part of the old line association leaders and the milk companies since over 30,000 farmers already have joined the CIO union!
The fact that a section of the farmers have learned by their own experiences the need for rallying together under the leadership of the labor movement is of tremendous historical significance, because it shows what the future can hold and it tears away the myth that the farmers are “anti-labor and always will be.”
In outlining the aims of the Dairy Farmers Union, which received its charter from District 50 of the UMWA, Foster pointed out:
“The United Dairy Farmers organization is to be operated by farmers; its policies mapped by farmers; its organizers will be farmers for the most part and its members will not be of the terroristic variety. It’s ridiculous of the Free Farmers to bring up the question of riots and so-called malicious damage. Such attacks only show the weakness of the opposition and certainly point to the desperate measures which the Free Farmers and other kindred groups are taking.”
 
Fair Price for Milk
“John L. Lewis is helping the farmer to form a new national organization that will have as its main purpose obtaining a fair price for milk for the farmer, which means cost of production plus a fair return on his labor.”
The concern within CIO unions over this move of John L. Lewis arises not from a basic consideration of what is good for organized labor – and having the farmers rallied behind labor is good for both – but rather fear that Lewis will become a great power again.
The CIO leaders could easily, if they desired, carry out some organizing campaigns which would eliminate or diminish this concern over Lewis. The Agricultural Workers Union of the CIO, for example, could do something for a change among the sharecroppers and day laborers. The CIO executive board could begin to take seriously the last convention slogan: “Organize and organize.” Instead, the CIO leaders, bent solely on selling the war to the workers, view the Lewis drive among the farmers only from a narrow factional viewpoint. Instead of hailing the tendency toward some unity between the worker and the farmer, they are spending their time cursing Lewis’ drive.
It is obvious why Lewis began this campaign. If his efforts to organize 3,000,000 dairy farmers meet with considerable success, he is in a position to be a powerful influence in the 1944 presidential elections, and also to regain his role in the labor movement. No doubt the same considerations caused him originally to become leader of the CIO movement. In each case, the basic advantages of the gains to the labor movement far outweighed the bureaucratic manipulations and purposes of Lewis.
 



The hopes and aspirations of the ranks of organized labor for unity between the CIO and the AFL, which received a sudden and somewhat unexpected impetus this week, soared at the magnificent prospects which lay before a unified labor movement.
Above all, the vision of having 10,000,000 organized workers in one central organization which would be the largest and most powerful body in America was a cheerful one to labor’s ranks, and a nightmare to the editorial writers of the capitalist press.
The end of an epoch of a house divided against itself, the end of major jurisdictional disputes between the CIO and the AFL, the diminishing of the bitterness fomented in the years of internecine strife, the feeling of class solidarity in one united organization – all these loomed as benefits of labor unity.
For labor everywhere would feel its own might and power, if united. The handwriting on the wall can be seen already by the labor-baiting Congressmen, whose chief stock in trade was to play off one section of the labor movement against the other.
A united labor movement could stand as a powerful bloc against reactionary moves in Congress, as the temporary bloc of the CIO with powerful sections of the AFL against the Smith Slave Labor Act recently revealed.
The favorite scheme of the big industrialists, “divide; and rule,” by which they hoped to crush the CIO and AFL unions in wartime is receiving a shattering blow from the trend toward unity.
 
Unite on Closed Shop
The first big jolt the industrialists and their allies received on this score was at the recent industry-labor conference held in Washington, where the CIO and the AFL united on the closed shop issue, and refused to freeze existing union gains for the duration of the war. Government officials and the industrialists had hoped to win the AFL over against the CIO on this issue, but were sadly mistaken.
The basic issue which divided the CIO and the AFL has long been settled in favor of the CIO. The triumph of industrial unionism over craft unionism as the correct way to build effective unions in mass production industries is testified to not only by the existence of the great auto, steel, rubber, coal and other CIO unions, but also by the fact that even AFL leaders who opposed the CIO have been forced by living events to organize workers into industrial unions. The AFL machinists union, which is organizing aircraft workers, is a good example. They have over 70,000 aircraft workers organized on an industrial basis.
 
What Unity Means
And the possibility of organizing America 100 per cent union grows much stronger as the trend toward unity reaches a culmination. For labor unity means that one of the biggest headaches in organization, the division and dispute between the CIO and the AFL, would largely be removed. It would be much more difficult to play off unions against each other.
The conversion of American economy into war production, with the hiring of millions of more workers in the mass production industries in the next boom period, assures that the hegemony of industrial unionism will be the decisive factor in the labor movement. For the industrial unions in auto, steel and elsewhere have already been tried and tested by events. They are capable of organizing the fresh stream of workers; who will flood into the huge factories.
Likewise the squeezing out of consumption goods industries and other “non-essentials” will tend to relegate some AF.L unions into a role of lesser influence in a the coming period.
So the reunification of the labor movement upon the basis of joining the millions of CIO militants, with the additional workers organized into the AFL in the last few years, as well as the old craft unions, would give the American working class an economic drive and power, and a political consciousness of its importance, such as was never before experienced in the history of labor in America.
 
Organize the Unorganized
The crucial question of uniting the American working class, the organized and the unorganized, will receive great impetus by a unification of the present divided organizations, because the attracting power of a great single body of organized labor will be magnetic. Organizing the unorganized will not be stopped. Quite the contrary, organization campaigns will receive spurts and achieve, far greater successes when the labor movement is united.
Labor unity brings these prospects, possibilities and advances, irrespective of the dirty, behind-the-scenes politics of the various bureaucratic cliques in the top leaderships of the AFL and the CIO.
The contempt and hatred which the ranks of labor have for the machinations of the whole breed of union bureaucrats in their mad scramble to take advantage of the trend toward unity should not blind workers to the tremendous advantages of labor unity. The condemnation of the bureaucratic methods by which labor unity is being handled should not be turned into opposition to labor unity.
As long as the labor bureaucracy exists, all its actions, whether around the unity question, control of unions, or any other issues, will be bureaucratic in nature, and the problem of the ranks is always to utilize every situation to fight for democracy inside the labor movement, without thereby opposing necessary actions, even if they are carried out in bureaucratic fashion. Lewis’ Reckless Action
The reckless actions of John L. Lewis, a bold, capable and unscrupulous union bureaucrat, are a case in point. Whether he calls a good mine strike, like the captive coal mine strike, by bureaucratic action, or whether he calls for labor unity, again by individualistic bureaucratic action, the problem of the militants is to judge the basic issue first. And in both cases (the strike and the call for unity) support should be given to this great mass movement, without thereby renouncing one bit the sharpest criticism of Lewis’ dictatorial methods.
The sudden proposals of the president of the United Mine Workers for unity with the AFL, in which he showed a lack of ordinary trade union loyalty to his associates in the CIO, reveal his bureaucratic approach to union’problems and, it must be said in passing, the fact that he is much more skillful and has more foresight in getting on the bandwagon than most other union leaders
But his case is no different than that of William Hutcheson, William Green, Sidney Hillman, Phillip Murray or other top leaders involved in this problem. All of them are of the same stripe, fundamentally.
 
Green a Scapegoat
The fulminations of William Green, AFL president, against Lewis do not flow from any interest in the ranks of labor, but rather from the fact that Green knows he has been picked as one of the scapegoats among the bureaucrats to take the blame for disunity. His retirement is foredoomed.
Nor do Phillip Murray’s protestations against Lewis’ maneuvers merit any special consideration for him and his role as CIO president. Murray for 20 years was right-hand man of John L. Lewis in precisely these kinds of maneuvers and deals. Murray’s “benevolent” dictatorship over the 500,000 steel workers in the Steel Workers Organizing Committee, who have never been able to elect their own international officers or hold their own convention, hardly qualifies him to complain about lack of democracy on the part of Lewis. What motivates him, rather, and those who support him, is their own role and future in a united labor movement, just as Lewis and others view the questions primarily from that angle.
Everyone in the labor movement knows that the Stalinists, since their line changed, have shifted from licking Lewis’ boots to Murray’s shoes and that today they are licking faster than ever in the hope that this will offer them some protection in the deals around the question of labor unity.
 
Stalinists to Be Purged
Their lip service to labor unity will be exposed exactly for what it is, a cynical ritual to deceive workers.and their own followers. For the Stalinists know that they also are going to be placed on the altar and be purged ruthlessly by Lewis and others in a unified labor movement.
All their top posts are a cinch to be lost, and only in so far as they retain ranks behind them will they be able to keep within the labor movement.
But while workers should have no sympathy for this “rule or ruin” clique, when its own methods are applied against it by its own “leader,” be it Lewis or even Murray, labor does have a stake in trade union democracy, and must oppose the bureaucratic methods of any purge.
In the ruthless and cruel game of power politics, against which labor ranks should continually blast and fight, but which at present will dominate the negotiations between the various CIO and AFL cliques, the key figures will be Lewis, dictator of the 600,000 coal miners; Dan Tobin, czar of the 600,000 AFL teamsters; Bill Hutcheson, head of the rich and powerful carpenters union; George Meany of the building trades, and the Sidney Hillman machine in the clothing workers’ union. These .men control the vast purse strings, the huge roll of jobs, and have the power. Lewis’ open knifing of Murray, his long-time associate, was significant not because it afforded Lewis some personal satisfaction in punishing an ex-colleague but because it showed that Murray, not having control of a large union, or his own machine, outside of Stalinist support at present, is doomed to second place in the game of power politics.
 
Lewis’ Threat
Even if Lewis does not appear this week before the CIO executive board, the ill-concealed threat he has of pulling the miners, and other unions he influences, out of the CIO into a unified labor movement is sufficient to speak more eloquently at the CIO executive board than all the windbag speeches, of two-by-four bureaucrats representing small or paper unions in the CIO, especially those controlled by the Stalinists. It is entirely possible that the Hillman machine, under Roosevelt’s thumb, will join in exerting what amounts to threats against the hesitant Murray, who was caught short in the maneuvers and spoke of them bitterly as another “Pearl Harbor.”
In the dynamics of the development of the trend toward unity, and the negotiations which will reflect the developments, there will be many ebbs and flows. Some more surprises – and more deals.
Labor’s ranks can learn tremendous lessons from a close study of these events. They can utilize the cracks and splits among the clique politicians on top to fight for the crying need in the labor movement, genuine trade union democracy.
And they must never forget that the most contemptible part of the union bureaucracy’s role comes from the fact that the whole gang of them is seeking to unite labor behind the imperialist war, rather than fighting for labor’s rights.
On this point, too, it is necessary to add another warning. Whether the union bureaucrats are united in one organization or control two divided organizations, they are all out to tie American labor to the imperialist war machine. However, under labor unity, the working class achieves certain advantages which make impossible, despite the bureaucrats, to fight against and resist more effectively the proposals that it pay the burden of Wall Street’s war.
The terrible inadequacy of the present trade union leadership in America, its incapacity of serving properly the interests of the rank and file of the union movement, are illustrated ; once again by the fact that the bureaucrats are going for unity, not because they saw the vital needs from the point of view of the ranks, but rather because of their own bureaucratic vested interests and their succumbing to a man to the pressure of the imperialist war. Viewing the present events broadly and taking into account both the vital needs and advantages of labor unity as well as a blistering analysis of the union bureaucrats who will consummate it, labor militants should adopt a simple, direct and clear program:
FOR LABOR UNITY! FOR TRADE UNION DEMOCRACY!
FOR ORGANIZING AMERICA 100 PER CENT UNION!
FOR A STRUGGLE TO MAKE THE RICH PAY FOR THEIR WAR!
 



The beginnings of a real national upset loomed in America as the disastrous costs of the bunglings of the Roosevelt regime through its Office of Production Management in going over to war economy became painfully evident throughout the country.
For the American people, especially the workers, are learning through their own experience the results of the bankruptcy of the Roosevelt regime, whose mistakes go far beyond the ordinary dislocations or difficulties expected when war came.
Besides the military reverses, two brutal facts stood out like sore thumbs, burning: up the people every time they think about them.
(1) Over 400,000 auto workers are either jobless now or soon will be on the soup line, facing a hard winter with only meager and inadequate social security benefits to exist on temporarily. All their valuable manpower is going to waste at a time when the newspapers talk about a “shortage of labor.”
And the CIO Economic Outlook predicts that even with triple war production, the number of unemployed will reach a total of 7,500,000 by October.
(2) While America’s military forces are demanding a flood of war supplies and materials, the auto industry, which has to produce most of the planes and tanks and other equipment, is largely idle, its present facilities and plans unable to cope with the job!
 
Months of Stalling
After months and months of stalling on these problems, the Roosevelt regime was forced to call a conference last week in Washington of CIO auto workers union officials, the auto barons and the Office of Production Management directors, William Knudsen and Sidney Hillman, to face the issue, because the unemployment crisis assumed the proportions of a national scandal.
Aware of the widespread resentment against its mismanagement, its pig-headed greed and its “business as usual” policies which meant profits at the expense of workers’ interests the auto industry officials published full page advertisements in leading newspapers in which a violent attack on unionism was featured and the CIO auto workers’ leaders were declared to have plans to take control of the auto industry.
In reply, the CIO, as a national body, and the auto workers union, printed large advertisements which placed squarely on the shoulders of the OPM and the auto industry the blame for the present crisis in unemployment and production.
The CIO charges were a mild accusation based primarily on more serious charges recently hurled at the OPM boss; Knudsen by Walter P. Reuther, director of the General Motors division of the United Automobile Workers Union, and author of the Reuther Plan for plane production.
 
Reuther’s Charges
Reuther recently pointed out, in a national radio broadcast, that

Knudsen sabotaged the Reuther Plan (for building 500 planes a day) without studying its merits because the auto magnates preferred “business as usual.” (Knudsen, as former vice-president of General Motors, is the big business spearhead in Washington politics.)
 
A high ranking cabinet member admitted that the plan was practical but warned Reuther it could not get a fair hearing from industry because “it comes from the wrong source.” (The cabinet member was Henry Morgenthau, Secretary of the Treasury.)
 
Nearly 94 small automotive parts plants in Detroit and scores of others like them in other areas have virtually no war work because Reuther’s plan was pigeon-holed. By January, as a result, over 150,000 auto workers in Michigan alone will be unemployed and thousands of others will be jobless in February.

For over a year Reuther has pressed his plan, bucking up against the Washington crowd without the slightest success, for President Roosevelt supported Knudsen and together they pampered the big business interests in their “business as usual” policies.
Like all other CIO officials, Reuther fails to mention that direct orders by Roosevelt could at any time have placed the Reuther Plan in operation and the crisis could have been avoided.
 
Big Business Stranglehold
So today, because big business has a stranglehold on Washington, because the President is their, ally and because the CIO officials didn’t put up a nation-wide struggle against the Washington-Wall Street combination the crisis is here.
The unemployed auto workers in. Detroit, sizzling at the incompetence of the war machinery, sore at the loss of their jobs, are demanding that the government take over the auto industry. Resolutions to this effect have been adopted by the West Side Local. The rank and file auto workers are displaying the right instincts in their demands for nationalization of the auto industry, as against the top CIO officials who, once again, joined in another advisory board, following the Washington conference, which has power only to give suggestions. This new ten-man board, five from the industry and five from labor, can take under its consideration such proposals as the Reuther Plan. But it has no power; it is merely an adjunct of the big business controlled Office of Production Management. Even if it had power, it would be dominated by the very force which has proved to be outmoded and unnecessary for production, namely, the industrial: magnates.
If the auto workers combined their demand that the government nationalize the auto industry with the vital demand for union control of the nationalized industry, then they would be one step forward, and a big one at that, toward the solution of their problems.
The need of the hour in Detroit and other auto centers is for the militant workers to raise the cry and mobilize to fight for “Conscription of the Auto Industry under workers’ control.”
 



Events in the auto industry during the past week have crystallized the crisis of production in a most revealing fashion.
“Business as usual” industrialists won a major victory in Washington at the joint conference on auto production, when all CIO proposals were pigeon-holed into an ineffective “advisory” committee on which labor was given a voice, but nothing else.
The American people were told in plain and unmistakable language by C.E. Wilson, president of General Motors, why the auto companies did not want to convert from auto to war production:
“We make 32 cents on a dollar on auto sales, while government contracts limit us to nine cents on the dollar.”
Such a blunt avowal of profits before anything else was, so damaging that the newspapers either failed to mention it, or buried it deep in their stories.
As far as plans like the Reuther or Murray programs are concerned, industry gave its answer both directly and through many spokesmen.
“The issue of whether the communistic idea of workers’ committees to control management and production shall be introduced into the defense program has come squarely before the OPM,” wrote David Lawrence, editor of the United States News, in speaking of the CIO proposals.
As a matter of fact, the Murray and Reuther plans do not directly provide for workers’ control of management and production, but so fearful are the bosses and their journalistic friends of the growing strength of the CIO, that they drag the issue in.
In view of the fact that several UAW locals have passed resolutions calling upon the government to nationalize the auto industry, the question is not without importance.
Suppose the auto industry WERE nationalized under workers’ control, as Labor Action advocates? What would be wrong with that? What argument can be offered against it other than the fact that a greedy handful of industrial profiteers would thereby no longer be able to gouge themselves with profits!
The brazen attitude of the industrialists and the Roosevelt representatives at the conference was too much for the CIO auto leaders, who expressed “keen disappointment” at the results arid predicted failure of the present “business as usual” setup.
Meanwhile, two other developments occurred which bear watching. Besides the 400,000 auto workers losing their jobs, the present planlessness of production is costing 40,000 auto dealers their businesses and also 400,000 auto sales and service employees their jobs! In both cases the victims are looking to the auto workers union for guidance and leadership, an exceedingly interesting and important trend! The auto union has a golden opportunity to lead a great mass movement, if it responds boldly and aggressively. The raising of the slogan – Nationalize the Auto Industry Under Workers’ Control – as a means of eliminating profiteering and priorities unemployment would meet with a genuine response from the workers who are sick and tired of the present mess!
 



The terrible specter of mass unemployment hovered over the head of the American labor movement as the year 1942 rolled around.
This gloomy prospect was emphasized in an official CIO report, published in the CIO Economic Outlook, in forecasting employment trends for 1942.
The CIO economists predicted that 2,500,000 workers would lose their jobs by next October because of a shortage of materials and the failure to convert existing plants into war production facilities.
Since the latest available figures show that at present there are around 4,000,000 unemployed, the new layoffs would bring the total to 6,500,000 unemployed by October, 1942.
Contrary to popular belief, expansion of arms production and the whole arms program will not increase employment, but tend to intensify the problem, the CIO says.
“The CIO has pointed out on many occasions the dislocations in employment which would be caused by the old level of the arms program. As our arms program is doubled or tripled, the dislocations in employment will be greatly intensified.”
This whole problem of unemployment will be aggravated by the fact that the cost of living will increase sharply, both for the employed and unemployed workers.
 
Food Prices Rise
The CIO estimates that food costs will rise 12 to 15 per cent in the coming year, augmenting a 20.8 per cent rise which took place between August 1939 and November 1941.
All wage gains of recent months will be wiped out by this upward trend in living costs, the CIO declares.
“The 17 per cent rise in average hourly earnings has been reduced to 4.5 per cent as the result of the increased cost of living. By February 1, with the cost of living rising at the rate of 1.5 per cent per month, the entire rise in hourly earnings will be wiped out.”
In contrast to, this outlook for the labor movement, the CIO points out that there has been a 32.2 per cent increase in profits of all business for the first three quarters of 1941, as compared to a similar period in 1940, according to the conservative Federal Reserve Board.
What all this means in terms of actual human existence should be clear. The workers, even during the height of war production, have no glorious future ahead of them. Even now, millions face unemployment.
 



INSIDE LATIN AMERICA
by John Gunther
Harper & Brothers, New York. 498 pages. $3.50
John Gunther is still on the “inside” march. In response to the urgings (!) of the present world situation he went south of the Rio Grande to explore the nether regions of the Western Hemisphere. He discovered many things, and in his helter-skelter, disorganized manner, proceeded to put them to writing, a key objective being to relate America’s interests and the Axis competitors’ among our neighbors, in light of the war. In his own words, Gunther sums up the whole problem as follows:
“Latin America counts heavily these days. It is of such vital importance to North America for a variety of reasons. First, our mounting trade, which in 1939 was worth $1,087,163,000. As a general rule United States imports from Latin America comprise roughly as per cent of our imports, a percentage not lightly to be disregarded. In 1939 our exports to Latin America were 17.9 per cent of our total trade. Figure for 1941 will be much higher.”
“Second, direct American investments in Latin America – in such categories as mines, utilities, packing plants, petroleum and the like – amount roughly to $2,840,000,000, which is about 40 per cent of all American investments abroad. Aside from direct investments, our loans are $1,610,331,794. These are hangovers from the lush days of the 1920s, and 77.2 per cent of them are wholly or partially in default. But, in theory at least, our total stake in Latin America is almost four and a half billion dollars.”
“Third, raw materials. Here the importance of the American Republics is profound. We cannot chew gum without Latin America – because Mexico and Guatemala provide the necessary chicle. We cannot play gramophone records without Latin America – because Brazil produces the necessary carnauba wax. If hemisphere trade were completely shut off, we would have no coffee for breakfast, very little cocoa, very few bananas. We might face serious shortages in bauxite, tungsten, manganese ore and tin.”
“The United States totally lacks these fourteen substances but Latin materials which are indispensable to the conduct of warfare and which we do not produce ourselves. We badly need – and will continue to need – stocks of these materials. They are: Antimony, chromium, coconut shell char, ferrograde manganese, manila fibre, mercury, mica, nickel, quartz crystal, quinine, rubber, silk, tin, tungsten.”
“The United States totally lacks these fourteen substances but Latin America has surpluses of several and with proper development could produce them all, except silk. Our neighbors can furnish us with antimony (Mexico and Peru), manganese (Brazil and Cuba), mercury (Mexico), quartz crystal (Brazil), chromium (Cuba), mica (Peru and Chile), and tin and tungsten (Bolivia). Coconut shell char could certainly be produced in Latin America if we need it, and manila fiber is now being made experimentally in Costa Rica. Brazil was once the world’s greatest producer of rubber, and an attempt is being made now to revive its rubber industry. Quinine can be grown in Ecuador.”
“Should the war spread to the Far East (this book was published before December 7, 1941 – J.W.) and cut off the United States from its normal sources of rubber, quinine, hemp and tin, we can only pray that Latin America will be a substitute. Nor should one forget that the Southern continent is today a very important producer of copper, petroleum, wool and foodstuffs, which are not included in our list of strategic shortages, but which might be highly useful in time of war. Or which might be very awkward in the hands of someone else.”
“Finally, political considerations. Latin America is, as I have said, our exposed Southern frontier.”
There, in a nutshell, is what the Good Neighbor policy is about, what America’s imperialist stakes are in Latin America (South America, in popular jargon).
 
Everything Is Different Now
For those reasons, frankly enumerated by Gunther, the lives of 120,000,000 people in South America are inexorably bound up with the lives of the 120,000,000 in the United States. Among the Latin Americans are 25,000,000 whites, 15,000,000 Negroes and 17,000,000 pure Indians. Over 63,000,000 people are mestizos (of mixed blood), adding to a problem which the United States hasn’t begun to solve in its own South. And just as at home one finds the basic conflict of class interests between the owning few and the millions of workers, so does Latin America present, perhaps in sharper form, the struggle of classes, to which is added the foreign oppressor, not the least dreaded of whom is the Yanqui imperialist.
Since Gunther is an “enlightened imperialist,” his interests lie in presenting a rather favorable canvas of Latin America and the rôle of American imperialism south of the Rio Grande. His sharp attacks are reserved, to be sure, for the Nazi and Italian agents, and people (nearly 10,000,000 of them) from these countries who compete with American agents for control of the various countries, either through outright military threat, economic strangulation or purchasing the favors of the ruling cliques and classes that sit on the powder keg of teeming millions.
Though Gunther uses the cleverest approach, “Yes, we committed sins, but the Good Neighbor policy is really not ruthless imperialism,” and “yes, the countries are dictatorially ruled, but are tending toward democracy,” the facts stand out, even in his book, and speak for themselves. For behind the fa$ades of “democracy” and the “Good Neighbor” policy are the realities which cannot remain ignored. This is shown by reference to the highlights of Gunther’s descriptions and comments on the Latin American countries.
 
How the Banana Countries Fare
Take the “Banana Republics” as an example:
“The United Fruit Company plays an important role in Costa Rica. though it is not as preponderant as in Honduras, say.
“President Somoza is the absolute and undisputed boss of Nicaragua, but he enjoys informality! (How nice!)
“Honduras, with Paraguay possibly excepted, is the poorest and least advanced state in the Americas.
“Honduras is the banana republic par excellence, and it is little more nor less than a preserve of of the United Fruit Company. About 30 per cent of all the company’s banana lands – valued at about $45,000,000 – are in Honduras. The company controls ports, harbors, newspapers, plantations. There are no taxes in Honduras (poverty is the only possession of the masses – J.W.); revenue comes from customs and the United Fruit. The government budget, about about $6,000,000, is usually out of balance and the company helps to make up the deficit. Recently, it advanced $300,000 to meet the government payrolls. Honduras is perpetually in debt.”
Colombia is one of Gunther’s “democracies” in which the masses don’t vote, can’t have unions, and are cruelly exploited by foreign business interests. The United Fruit Company has a monopoly on the banana industry; the United States controls the oil industry. Gunther adds:
“What Colombians resent – with some reason – is what they call the ‘hole-in-the-well’ policy of the United States investors. We dig out gold, they say, we suck out oil, and leave nothing for Colombia. But this is not entirely just ... the direct investment in Colombia is a fairly important sum, $228,000,000. Most of it is in oil, utilities and mining.” (If it were expropriated, United States investors might have left something for Colombia – J.W.)
Let’s take two other important countries, also signers of the pact at Rio de Janeiro recently.
Bolivia, the land of “bitter poverty,” is known for its tin and oil deposits. Here’s a thumbnail sketch of what that country is about, using Gunther’s description.
“It is a kind of ‘company town’ of the tin merchants, dominated by the army also ... The most important character in Bolivia has not set foot in the country for nineteen years. He is Simon Patino, the greatest tin merchant in the world, and one of its wealthiest men (estimated wealth, $500,000,000) ... The political situation in Bolivia is that Patino and the army dominate it.”
Chile, “only country in the world with a Popular Front government,” has excellent nitrate deposits, long exploited by the Guggenheim interests, and a rich copper industry, owned 95 per cent by Anaconda and other American concerns. “The basic political struggle in Chile is much like that in Argentina, which we shall inspect presently. It is a struggle between Right and Left, between the landed oligarchs and the rising radical underpossessed,” Gunther points out, carefully ignoring the fact that the main struggle is against the imperialist domination of the United States.
 
A Look at Argentina
Argentina, from a material point of view, is the richest, most powerful and the most progressive country in Latin America. It is gripped by a profound crisis, political, economic and social. Gunther explains the four master bonds it has with Europe – it has greater affinity to Europe than to the United States.
“First, historical, the country is essentially white; there is no Negro problem, and scarcely any mestizo problem. The Indians had no civilization in the La Plata region; they were nomads – they did not even weave blankets – and were killed off early. Second, economic. European and particularly British capital built up the country – British investments alone are still worth about $2,000,000,000 – and about 40 per cent of total exports customarily went to Britain. Third, cultural and intellectual. Practically all intellectual currents came from Europe, and every Argentine of the upper classes thought of Paris as his spiritual home. I have met Argentinians who never read a book in Spanish till they were so. Everything had to be French. Fourth, religious. The all-powerful church represented a profound European influence, not merely for historical reasons, but because almost all priests in Argentina were Spanish or Italian.”
Gunther hints at the grave agricultural, or more accurately, peasant problem of Argentina, by his very description of the families, the wealth of the estates they own, which make up the powerful landowning class and which competes with the industrial and mercantile bourgeoisie for state power in the country.
The Alzaga Unzue family owns 1,091,586 acres valued at $26,624,814! The Anchorena, 945,194 acres, $15,970,000; Luro, 573,869 acres, $5,096,436; Pereyra, 472,308 acres, $11,317,336. Eleven other families own estates (feudal baronies would be a more appropriate description) that range from 500,000 acres to 250,000. And twelve others own land from 250,000 acres to 100,000 acres.
Here is a typical example of them, and also a key to understanding Gunther’s whole superficial approach to the problems of Latin America: “I spent one of the happiest weekends in my life as a guest on one of the greatest Argentine estancias. It covered 120,000 acres; it held 40,000 sheep, 30,000 cattle, and between 6,000 and 7,000 horses. It had its own railway station, its own telegraph; it had its own churches, hospitals, shops, a dairy, a police post. It was – and is – a kind of self-governing community rare and wonderful to behold!” What about the over-worked gauchos (ranch hands) and the peons! A brief reference – revealing in itself – that the gauchos on a prosperous and “progressive” estancia get $17.50 a month and keep. The peons get about $13.50 a month, a piece of land to till and some beef on this same estancia. That is all! Yet the burning question to millions of Argentines is of little consequence to the journalist who had a good time!
 
The “Most Jealous” of Neighbors
From these vast domains of the land-owning oligarchy comes the beef, the grain, the linseed, and the wool that comprise Argentina’s chief and profitable exports. The fact that these clash directly with the products of Texas and other Western states is the chief obstacle to a bloc, or treaty, or full co-operation between Washington and the Argentine oligarchs. Sumner Welles or Cordell Hull can’t make a deal with the rulers of Argentina, since the importation of beef and other products from down there creates a domestic crisis in the United States. The Western bloc in Congress is very powerful!
Gunther summarizes the relationships between the United States and Argentina under the rather amusing title, Why Some Argentinians Dislike the U.S.A.
“First and foremost, the crucial question of beef just mentioned, as well as general commercial rivalry.
“Second, nationalist jealousy and latent fear of North American imperialism. Argentina considers itself the competitor of the United States for hemisphere leadership.
“Third, lack of knowledge, insularity. Few prominent Argentinians have ever visited New York or Washington.
“Fourth, the tactlessness of many American business men in Argentina. The revolting provincialism and vulgarity of many American movies. The inadequacy of American radio programs. The convictions of many Argentinians that most citizens of the United States are savages from the cultural point of view.
“Fifth, many of the British who had a profound influence in developing Argentina were colonial-minded Yankee-haters, and the Argentines came to reflect this attitude.
“Sixth (it seems incredibly remote), the Spanish-American War. Many Argentines remember this war vividly, or were told about it by their fathers, and most of them took the Spanish side.
“Seventh, psychological envy of United States power, wealth and influence.”
Notwithstanding previous descriptions, Gunther proclaims Argentina, where only a small portion of the population votes, and where the government is completely dominated by the land-owning oligarchy, where the industrial and commercial capitalists compete for power, a democracy!
 
America’s Brazilian Friend
While one dislikes to slip Cuba, Mexico and other very important countries in this review, space limitations demand it. Yet Brazil must be included in this review, if only briefly.
Brazil, a country larger than the United States, has 43,000,000 people, which Getulio Vargas, erstwhile president, has run, to use Gunther’s expression, as a “one man show.” An army man from way back, Vargas assumed power in the 1930 military struggle in which he was victorious. He withstood the challenge of an opposition consisting mainly of industrial and landowning dissidents, as against his rich and powerful supporters, in the 1932 “revolution,” which lasted three months. In 1934 he forced through a “constitution” which “legalized” his dictatorial rule. In 1935 he ruthlessly crushed a revolt under Stalinist leadership. In 1937, when his term of office, under his own constitution ended, Vargas put the country under martial law and accomplished a coup d’état.
This man, along with Colonel “Butcher” Batista of Cuba, and similar types, are the so-called friends of democracy! These are the type of political and military adventurers palmed off on the American people by the Roosevelt Administration as “allies in the struggle against fascism.” Vargas, the man who killed and tortured hundreds of workers, including Stalinists, is now the white hope of the Stalinists in Brazil!
But a bargain can be made with the Brazilian dictator over coffee. And Cuba has sugar to export. The State Department many years ago learned this fact. So these countries have become “pillars of defense.”
Let me say in passing that all the brutal facts which can be gleaned from Gunther’s books are available in much clearer and rounded-out form in the book written and published by the Royal Institute of Public Affairs (of His Majesty’s government). This book, appearing in 1939, also goes into the story of industrial development and the labor movement – a subject that Gunther ignores with all the disdain of a British colonial servant looking down on an Indian.
Other Factors and the Future
Gunther discreetly mentions the rôle of the powerful and rich Catholic Church, always to the right of everyone in politics and powerful because of its vast holdings. The British scholars, no doubt, influenced by their Protestant sympathies, do an excellent job of gathering the facts on the Church’s reactionary rôle in Latin America. They tell the almost unbelievable story of the “Spanish Inquisition” in these colonies that wiped out millions of natives who didn’t like accepting Jesus at the end of a sword, lash, or fiery cross.
Out of this broad panorama of Latin America certain basic conclusions present themselves. These countries, with either a semi-colonial or colonial status, have a triple fight on their hands: national independence, the combining of the democratic with a socialist revolution, and the agricultural revolution against the semi-feudal system that now oppresses millions. Since there are added to these major problems, the millions of savages living in the Amazon area, which is wilder, more primitive and inaccessible than darkest Africa, one can see how the law of combined development must operate on this continent.
The more one studies the complexities of the Latin American countries and the problems of the masses of people, workers, peons and the savages, the more one realizes that here is a continent and peoples that, above all, need the support and strength of the powerful American labor movement in their struggle for real freedom.
The sooner the American working class aids this struggle (such as the CIO helping to organize the Latin American oil, rubber, steel, copper and tin workers against the very same companies the CIO is fighting at home) the sooner will there be a solution to the miseries and tragedies of Latin America’s millions.
These are things Gunther doesn’t talk about. That is why his companion piece to Inside Europe and Inside Asia is a tenth-rate book, purely superficial in character and written primarily to do its part in aiding American imperialism to strengthen and keep its hold over Latin American countries it now dominates, and to capture others. Gunther’s book serves to cover up for the conscience-stricken liberal, the fact that in this World War, American imperialism, even though belatedly, is seeking a world empire, far mightier than Britain ever dreamed, and Latin America, in this scheme of things, is to be an inevitable first victim
And the Englishman who told the American: “You may take Canada from us, but never Argentina,” back in 1937, is wrong. American imperialism will gobble up both, unless the working class calls a halt to imperialism.
 



Notorious for their weasel-worded articles when they change their line, the Stalinists overdid themselves last week in a huge editorial spread in the Daily Worker entitled A War Labor Policy.
This editorial is the tip-off on the kind of arguments and the aim of the Communist Party in hog-tying the labor movement to the war machine, if it is possible, and of selling labor’s interests down the river.
Take the vital question of war profiteers, and the huge profits all the corporations are making while labor can’t get decent raises to meet the higher cost of living. Here’s what the Daily Worker says:
“When short-sighted men and groups speak of labor seeking to ‘profit’ or ‘share in the war profits’ or ‘take advantage of the war,’ every intelligent and honest trade unionist has to reply: We don’t talk their language.”
Naturally, labor unionists don’t speak in terms of “seeking profit,” only in terms of wages. And also, labor unionists never speak about “taking advantage of the war,” because there isn’t any to be taken.
But, by combining those two obvious facts with another – “share in the war profits” – the Stalinists perform a neat little trick to slander any worker who believes labor should share in the huge war profits by obtaining higher wages.
The Stalinists actually will try to get the phoney idea across that anyone who talks or thinks that the big corporations shouldn’t get away with their fabulous profits, isn’t a good union man! Even though it is obvious that fighting against the war profiteers is the duty of every union man.
Now, a few years ago, if we made such a statement there would be some doubts among the workers. But, fortunately, everyone has seen the somersaults of the Stalinists so often that the labor movement knows anything can be expected from Stalin’s hatchetmen in the American labor movement.
 
Against Higher Wages
How will the Stalinists argue against labor getting higher wages? Or defending its interests during wartime, when everyone knows that the big corporations, Bethlehem, etc., are trying to smash the labor movement.
Here’s the key to their line on that point: “We have no doubt that the working class will in the future even more than at present, view every question from the standpoint of the needs of the war!”
What does this mean? Exactly the same thing that the bosses mean when they shout about the “needs of the war” when labor asks for a half-way decent pay increase to meet the rising cost of living.
The Stalinists will foam and fret and yell and scream in the union meetings: “Yes, we are for higher wages, but the needs of the war come first.” Which means they won’t fight for higher wages ... and, most important of all, accuse workers who demand higher wages of “hindering the war effort.” An argument picked up from the Wall Street Journal.
That’s the argument they’ll use on unions which they don’t control. Where the Stalinists are powerful, they’ll use cruder and slanderous arguments. Anyone who opposes them becomes a “Hitler agent,” a “poison-peddler,” etc., etc.
 
A Little Variety
Of course, in all the unions and in all situations, the Stalinists aren’t going to act exactly the same. But they’ll have just enough variety in their arguments to suit the occasions. This is indicated in the Daily Worker statement on real wages, from the same editorial
“The whole question of real wages as distinguished from money wages must be approached the same way. This means assuredly that the wages of the very low income groups must in the interests of the war program be adjusted upward. That is to say, they must have a higher living standard in order to assure their efficiency and productivity.”
The lowest paid workers must be paid more, NOT because they deserve it for their labor, NOT because the corporations are rolling in wealth, but because they can’t work as good if they are under-fed, and ill-clothed, and ill-housed, says the Daily Worker.
It would be difficult to show more contempt for the workers than the Daily Worker does in this statement. It’s the old farm argument about horses and mules: “If you don’t feed the animals, they can’t work as much.”
The Daily Worker admits it speaks “in the interests of the war program” in this approach to the problem of wages. A good union man, however, approaches the problem of wages from the interests of the workers as a class, from the interests of the labor movement.
The role of the Stalinists in the labor movement, for the next period, as clearly outlined in their “war labor policy,” is to become “efficiency experts” in the plants, apologists for the big corporations’ policies and profits, and a drag on all unions seeking to defend themselves from the employers’ onslaughts.
 



AKRON. – The most inspiring and commendable example of labor solidarity in this period of C.I.O.-A.F. of L. warfare was developed here last week when every C.I.O. and A.F. of L. union rallied behind Goodyear strikers whose picket lines were temporarily crushed by a vicious police attack that sent over 100 people to the hospital and tear-gassed hundreds of others.
Not since the tensest moment of the famed five-week Goodyear strike in February 1936 was Akron labor confronted with a graver crisis. Chaos prevailed for the few hours following the night-long reign of terror planned and carried out by Goodyear through its thugs and city police.
 
Unity Achieved
In the face of this fundamental challenge to its very existence, Akron labor responded. The petty fights between C.I.O. and A.F. of L. unions here, as well as the deep cleavage between them, were forgotten in this hour of danger.
A United Labor Defense Committee backed by the entire labor movement was set up. Threats of an immediate transportation strike and a truck-drivers strike stopped the drive momentarily against the Goodyear workers. Talk of a general strike reached the ears of the labor-hating bosses and cooled off their violent passions.
Akron labor achieved unity in action against the boss class. The results speak for themselves. It is a lesson and an example for unionists throughout the country who want to defend their organizations in this time of crisis against the offensive of the employers.
The need for unity of the labor movement was never greater than at the present time. The example of Akron could be multiplied a thousand times. Labor must achieve solidarity in a common fight against its common enemy – the ruling class – if it is to survive.
 
The Second Lesson
There is a second great lesson to be learned from the Akron experience. In the historic five-week Goodyear strike of 1936 that established the C.I.O. as a mass movement, rubber workers did not suffer from brutal police attacks. Picket lines remained intact and the strike was won despite formation of vigilante movements, despite the hostility of the same mayor who holds office today, despite a march on the strikers by an army of deputies and police which collapsed before it reached the strikers.
Any Akron worker would tell you why the labor-haters failed in 1936. The picket lines were organized and well-prepared to defend themselves against any kind of attack. Labor relied on its own might and power then. It was successful.
Last Thursday night, Akron labor was empty-handed. It was unprepared, and Goodyear and the police department knew it. They took advantage of it. The reign of terror – a nice commentary on American “democracy” – followed.
 
Defense is Necessary
The contrast between 1936 and 1938 was evident and the lesson to be drawn was made clear by almost every union leader who spoke at the mass protest meeting a day later. Akron labor must always be ready to defend itself. It must always be on guard. Let other union centers learn this lesson without the cost that the Akron workers paid.
The United Labor Defense Committee created by the C.I.O. and the A.F. of L. unions here was a real stride forward in building an organization which can keep labor on its guard and which can prepare labor to defend itself against any attack.
This committee should be transformed into a permanent body whose duty must be to create groups of workers in each union subject to call day or night to defend the rights of labor. It should form workers’ defense committees in every union. It should be able to mobilize thousands of workers to face any possible threat to the union movement.
Such a workers’ defense committee today can prevent the smashing of picket lines. It can preserve free speech and assemblage to the unionists. And tomorrow it can be ready to meet Fascist hordes who today do their work in vigilante movements, as strike-breakers, as company thugs, and blue-coats parading as the “Law.”
 



AKRON, Ohio. – A campaign to provide for supplementary relief for W.P.A. and industrial employee along the lines of the “Minneapolis plan” was begun here this week by the Akron C.I.O. council and Goodyear Local, United Rubber Workers of America.
By mobilizing the labor movement behind this fight, union leaders seek to revitalize the unions and to alleviate the suffering of thousands of families living on sub-existence levels.
 
Praise Local 544
The campaign was announced in the Summit County Labor News, which gave much credit to the Minneapolis Teamsters Unions for initiating the system of supplementary relief on a sound basis.
Over 110,000 of the 225,000 inhabitants of Akron are on one kind of relief or another, and thousands of rubber workers are working less than two days a week, thereby making a system of supplementary relief indispensible for the sheer existence of the people.
The plan of the Akron unionists was indicated in a resolution passed by Goodyear Local and the C.I.O. council. It reads:
 
Text of Resolution
Whereas, The present amount of wages received by W.P.A. workers and by part-time industrial employees is not sufficient to meet the minimum standard of living needs, especially of large families, and
Whereas, This grave situation has been solved mainly in one city, Minneapolis, as indicated in a recent issue of the Northwest Organizer, official Teamsters Joint Council publication, and
Whereas, The solution was achieved through the introduction of a system of supplementary relief for any company or W.P.A. employee whose wages were insufficient to permit a family to have a minimum standard of living whose cost was determined by a union survey, and
Whereas, Under the system of supplementary relief, the employee of either a private concern or of the W.P.A. obtains in cash the difference between his wages and the amount needed for the minimum standard, as shown by the attached clipping from the Northwest Organizer, therefore, Ask Supplementary Relief
Be it resolved, That we go on record in favor of such a system of supplementary relief, and that we seek to institute a similar system in Akron, in conjunction with the proper authorities, and that we urge the entire labor movement and the Workers Alliance to join with this union in the campaign.
* * *
The campaign is not being made as a substitute for jobs, or adequate wages. Union leaders see it as a good supplementary move to fight against the effects of the social crisis and to place the burden on the rich.
Already, relief officials have announced giving of more liberal allowances, and of permitting part time industrial employees to obtain W.P.A. jobs or relief while holding down their regular jobs.
 



AKRON, O. – A vicious campaign that can endanger the unity of the Akron labor movement and destroy the militant traditions of the United Rubber Workers of America was opened here last week by the Communist Party following its inability to curb the resurgence of progressive union policies that have revived and strengthened the union movement during and since the Goodyear strike.
The rule or ruin policy of the Stalinists was outlined in the June 18 issue of the Midwest Daily Record, official C.P. paper, by James Keller, Akron Stalinist organizer.
Confronted by the unanimous approval of every action of the United Labor Defense Committee (C.I.O. and A.F.L.), during the recent strike, the Stalinists haven’t dared attack it openly.
 
Launch Sniping Attack
Instead, they have launched a sniping attack by “blaming” only the A.F.L. leaders in the committee for the “provocative” stand Akron labor took in warning the mayor and police that further violence would not be tolerated.
“Trotskyism!” cried the Stalinist spokesmen, when the Akron labor movement sought to defend its picketing rights and civil liberties in an emergency.
“Trotskyism!” Keller yelped at militants for their outstanding work in the Goodyear situation, hoping thus to terrorize them with his crude red scare.
The Midwest Daily Record criticized the marvelous mass meeting which protested police brutality. It termed the militant speeches given by C.I.O. and A.F.L. officials “ill advised and thoughtless,” claiming them given because of “pressure of the Trotskyites who raised the slogan: Meet force with force – organize squads for labor defense.”
 
Seek to Wreck Defense
In their frantic efforts to quell militant action, the Stalinists saw in the fine solidarity of the A.F.L. and C.I.O. only “a bid of the Trotskyites for leadership.”
Unable to dictate the policies of the United Labor Defense Committee, the Stalinists seek to wreck it by playing off the A.F.L. against the C.I.O.
The Stalinist program for Akron in essence is: Repudiate the good work of the Defense Committee in the Goodyear strike; exclude all unionists who refuse to take orders and therefore are called Trotskyites; forget the lessons of the Goodyear strikes; and substitute class collaboration for the building of strong, progressive unions.
Fearful of alienating the labor movement, Keller is forced to praise some of the actions during the strike, namely the radio publicity, the frequent strategy board meetings and the calling of a special Goodyear meeting.
These actions, he calls “non-Trotskyite” policies when, as a matter of fact, these policies were adopted unanimously by the Defense Committee, which Keller claims was dominated by the “Trotskyites.”
 
Record of Militants
After declaring the Trotskyites were responsible for all actions leading to the settlement, and thereby confessing the weaknesses of the Stalinists, Keller tries to save face by claiming the Trotskyites “were badly whipped.”
Unfortunately for Keller’s position, Akron militants know that the so-called Trotskyites pressed hard for A.F.L.-C.I.O. unity for a favorable settlement of the strike; and that they were extremely active in helping the Akron labor movement to achieve these progressive aims.
It is highly significant that the Keller article has not yet been distributed in Akron, because the C.P. fears that the openly reactionary policies expressed in the Midwest Daily Record would further expose them.
Meanwhile, the Akron labor movement is warned and prepared against further attacks on its militancy under the guise of attacks on “Trotskyism.”
 




Pins and Needles
The session of the Executive Board of the International Ladies Garment Workers Union, where it was voted not to participate in the founding convention of the C.I.O., brought into the open a serious difference of opinion in the top leadership of that union.
It is a well-known fact that Isadore Nagler heads the pro-A.F. of L. group within the board. David Dubinsky, International President, favors a more cautious policy. Unfortunately, there is no strong pro-C.I.O. group in the board. Charles Zimmerman, Lovestoneite follower, ventured only to make a cautious “statement” to the resolution passed against participating in the C.I.O. convention. Of course, in line with the Lovestoneite policy of playing around with union bureaucracies and depending on them, Zimmerman has not and will not play any independent role.
Nagler and company carried the day. They make no bones about their A.F. of L. sympathies. In remarkable contrast to the policies and program of the I.L.G.W.U. leadership are the sentiments and sympathies of the rank and file, according to a private survey conducted by C.I.O. leaders, which were reported to John L. Lewis. It is claimed that the overwhelming bulk of the members are pro-C.I.O. and want to be part of that movement.
One of the highest C.I.O. leaders in New York went so far as to predict a split in the I.L.G.W.U. if the A.F. of L.-minded group won and took the union back into the William Green organization.
It is a tragedy that the I.L.G.W.U. is slowly but surely moving in the direction of the A.F. of L. It means a blow at industrial unionism symbolized in the C.I.O. and it strengthens the hand of the A.F. of L. “diehard” clique.
* * *

C.P.-oison for Militant
The Akron Beacon-Journal carries the news item that Charles Collins, president of General Local, United Rubber Workers of America, was defeated in re-election by Ray Sullivan, a prominent young unionist. Behind this defeat lies an interesting story. Collins was an up-and-coming militant leader until the soft-words of Jim Keller, Stalinist party organizer, seduced him. Collins became a stooge, and this quickly antagonized the large body of members of the union which is the fourth largest U.R.W.A. local in Akron, Sullivan was and still remains an independent militant. He has devoted much time to constructive union-building. Collins was too busy playing Stalinist politics in the C.I.O. council to give enough attention to his own union. Result: Another militant ruined by his association with the Stalinists.
* * *

Tobin’s Prompter
It is generally understood in labor circles that the strong stand of Dan Tobin, president of the teamsters’ international, for labor unity against the reactionary position of the A.F. of L. “die-hard” clique was mainly influenced by President Roosevelt with whom Tobin is on very friendly terms. Pressure from his own ranks, it is said, was a secondary consideration.
* * *

Won’t Pay for Pie
C.I.O. leaders in New Jersey will have a little explaining to do to the next state convention because L. Goldsmith, a Stalinist from New York, was made executive secretary of the state C.I.O. council after the first convention was over and despite a promise that an “impartial non-political New Jersey unionist” would be chosen for the post.
Already the action has antagonized large sections of the C.I.O. movement in New Jersey who went along with the convention only because they felt it would be possible to exclude the Stalinists. The rank and file isn’t very interested in paying hard-earned money to support another Stalinist pie-card artist whose chief work will consist in tearing down the militancy of the unions and slandering all opposition.
* * *

Leg-Work ...
The marked trend within the C.I.O. of large and militant unions staying away from state C.I.O. councils because Stalinists automatically control them through paper unions was again noted in the Connecticut C.I.O. state convention. Since the C.I.O. constitution does not make participation compulsory, the non-Stalinists are more and more voting against the Lewis-Stalinist bloc with their feet, i.e., walking out, or staying out.
* * *

Information
A worker writes in that he wants information on the truck-building plants. Facts on wages, hours and working conditions. We would appreciate hearing from the field on this matter.
* * *

Back to Normal
Have you noticed the sharp increase in militancy among the rank and file of the C.I.O. since they returned to their jobs recently as a result of the little upswing in business? The auto workers are a good case in point. Reports from a couple of steel areas give the same indication.
* * *

Bread or Bullets?
Armaments vs. WPA? Bread or bullets? These are some of the main problems posed by the Roosevelt program of building a super-war machine by starving the unemployed through relief cuts. This is an issue around which great support can be obtained in unemployed and union organizations. Here is a real job for progressive unionists.
 



A damaging blow to the cause of unity in the labor movement was dealt this week by the reactionary executive council of the A.F. of L. when it expelled the United Mine Workers of America, backbone of the C.I.O., from the Federation.
President William Green of the A.F. of L. implied that the revocation of the miners’ charter, and two other smaller C.I.O. unions, was a compromise between the civil war policy advocated by the “diehards” and the policy of “moderates” in the executive council.
The Federation of Flat Glass workers and the Mine, Mill and Smelter workers were the other two international unions whose charter were revoked.
 
Leadership Divided
The action of the executive council came after two weeks of indecision which reflected the division within the top A.F. of L, leadership. Dan Tobin, of the Teamsters, and George Harrison, of the Railroad Brotherhoods, were for moderation. Bill Hutcheson, of the Carpenters, headed the “civil war” group.
The strategy of the A.F. of L. executive board in expelling the miners’ union is obvious. It hopes to “isolate” the John L. Lewis-controlled section of the C.I.O., and cause a split in C.I.O. ranks.
David Dubinsky, president of the International Ladies Garment Workers Union, indirectly played a part in determining this strategy by his recent public attack on Lewis.
 
Hope in Dubinsky
Louis Stark, of the New York Times, pointed out in his article of February 6 that the A.F. of L. was placing hope in winning Dubinsky away from the C.I.O., and having him, “carry the ball across the C.I.O. goal line.” It was this difference between Dubinsky and Lewis that gave the A.F. of L. council new vigor and aided in determining the policy of continued hostility to the C.I.O.
Surprise was expressed in many labor circles that of the major C.I.O. Unions only the miner’s union was expelled. The Amalgamated Clothing Workers was “slated to go,” too, according to the “civil war” theory. The very fact that this demand of the “diehards” was not voted by the council indicates that open warfare on too wide a front is not yet the plan of the A.F. of L. leaders.
The revocation of the Mine, Mill and Smelter Workers Union charter was part of the plan to “isolate” the miners, since this international is closely tied up with the Lewis-controlled U.M.W.A.
 
Raid Plan Seen
The bitter internal dispute in the Flat Glass Workers Union which led to the ousting of Glen McCabe as international president, offered the A.F. of L. the hope of “raiding” that industry. McCabe turned against the C.I.O. following his overthrow and probably expects to capture some locals for the A.F. of L. McCabe was originally suspended when charges were placed against him in regard to use of the C.I.O. union funds.
The executive council did not vote on the appeal of the Pennsylvania State Federation of Labor against the Green order to purge itself of C.I.O. affiliates. If the State Federation of Labor is forced to cause a split of Pennsylvania labor, it means that the A.F. of L. leaders will intensify hostilities against the C.I.O. on the political field.
A split in the ranks of Pennsylvania unions would seriously affect the political perspectives of the Lewis machine, which intends to run Thomas Kennedy, secretary-treasurer of the miner’s union, for governor.
 
Green Hits League
Green repeated his blast of last fall, against Labor’s Non-Partisan League in a special report to the council. He termed it a “mere tool and mouthpiece of the C.I.O.” His previous attack was ignored in many labor centers but today it might mean further action against the. C.I.O. in the political sphere.
These recent developments delay the possibility of peace in the labor movement. In his study of the situation, Stark aptly summed up the prospect and perspectives by writing:
“If for the present hostilities do not cease, it will not mean an end to peace hopes nor an end of striving toward renewal of peace parleys. Resumption of peace negotiations will be made more difficult by these hostilities, but forces both inside and outside labor will continue to work for unity in labor.”
 



While exposing the treacherous and disruptive role of the Stalinist Party in the labor movement, the Benjamin Stolberg articles, Inside the C.I.O., printed in the Scripps-Howard chain of newspapers, suffered from the usual defects of liberal journalism.
Although many labor leaders inspired by the Stalinists have condemned Stolberg’s articles, not a single prominent person outside the Stalinist circle has as yet disagreed with his fundamental analysis of the Stalinists.
 
Correct Premise
“The Communist Party today is neither red nor Communist nor revolutionary,” Stolberg wrote. “It is in every country a branch of the Stalinist dictatorship. The force of the Communists derives from their totalitarian source in Moscow. They are interested in the American labor movement only insofar as they can use it for the political purposes of Stalinist world policy. Hence, they must rule or ruin.”
This basic evaluation is correct. The West Coast labor movement, above all, has discovered through bitter experience, the real role played by the Stalinists.
Only a few weeks ago, the Sailors and Firemens unions repudiated in unmistakable fashion the Stalinist policies which Harry Bridges advocates under the guise of the C.I.O.
Militant, progressive and class-conscious unionism is feared by the Stalinists because of the obstacles it presents to the war-mongering policies advocated by Earl Browder and his henchmen. Stolberg’s expose of the Stalinists was, however, weakened by his inadequate explanation of this basic motive behind the “rule or ruin,” order of Stalin to the Browder-Bridges clique.
 
False Characterization
The United Automobile Workers of America has been the scene of the latest and most intensive campaign of the Stalinists to capture a powerful union movement.
Stolberg devoted considerable space to exposing the double-dealing and unprincipled maneuvers of the Stalinists there. Yet he lost much of the force of his arguments by a false characterization of Homer Martin, the sky-pilot president of the auto workers.
“Homer Martin and his administration in the U.A.W. are known as the ‘progressive’ group. That name describes their program,” Stolberg said. “The opposition known as the ‘unity’ faction is bent on only one thing – to control or destroy Martin and to try to impose upon the union a Communist-guided leadership.”
Actually, Homer Martin’s program in its trade union aspects differs not in the least from that of the unprincipled Stalinist clique opposing him. Heywood Broun, writing in the New Republic, might find fault with Stolberg’s praise of Martin, but he neglects to mention that Martin’s opponents are of the same breed. Broun picks one flaw in an effort to discredit the main import of the articles.
 
Unprincipled Opposition
It is a fact, testified to by the minutes of the International executive board meeting’s, that those “oppositionists” to Martin – Mortimer, Reuther, etc. (Stalinist stooges of the Broun variety) have voted with Martin on all important union questions since the convention last fall! That is why their “opposition” is unprincipled.
In the recent Pontiac sit-down, the entire executive board approved of Martin’s actions and criticism of the rank and file that had been goaded into a sit-down by the company. Incidentally, on all these questions, the Lovestonites went along as appendages to the Martin machine.
The pitfalls of liberal analysis are clearly indicated in the Stolbergian evaluations of the C.I.O. top leaders. Dave Dubinsky was called a “shrewd politician, a hard bargainer, as tough as he is honest, and full of fun.” At whose expense, we might ask? What about the Dubinsky who fought the left-wing for years ? Hillman, according to Stolberg, is, “almost the opposite of Dubinsky. He lacks Dubinsky’s good humor, his tough and homely democracy.”
“Hillman’s fault is his self-overestimation.” Yes, yes, but what about the internal situation in the Amalgamated Clothing Workers union? Remember what Hillman tried to do to Joseph Schlossberg because Schlossberg would not go along with the Roosevelt election campaign?
 
Weaknesses Ignored
Stolberg, throughout his series, said nothing about the fatal weakness of the C.I.O., its bureaucratic structure. In his desire to protect the C.I.O. from vicious outside opponents and from the insidious Stalinists, Stolberg did some unnecessary “white-washing” of the leadership.
John L. Lewis deserves credit for promoting industrial unionism as C.I.O. chairman, as Stolberg pointed out. But that does not excuse his faults. The Ohio district miners are still fighting for the right to elect their own officials. And when are the steel workers going to be permitted to hold a constitutional convention to set up an autonomous international union? Is Phillip Murray ever going to allow the S.W.O.C. to elect its own international officers?
Harry Bridges’ policies have divided the once powerfully united West Coast labor movement as Stolberg showed. But Lewis arbitrarily appointed Bridges, and thus bears joint responsibility.
 
Union Democracy
When Stolberg told about the struggle of the top C.I.O. leaders to establish “industrial democracy,” he did not emphasize that a necessary pre-requisite is “union democracy.” This weakness in the C.I.O. is fuel for the fires of labor’s opponents, and the way to take away the fuel is to establish union democracy in the steel and other C.I.O. unions where it is lacking.
Stolberg’s summary deserves special attention. “The program of the C.I.O. is simple, progressive and historically inevitable. Modern industrial labor must organize in industrial unions,” Stolberg wrote. Will the Daily Worker hack journalists call this a “fascist” argument? Stolberg is absolutely, correct.
“The C.I.O. is not getting ready for independent political action in 1940. The political arm of the C.I.O. is Labor’s Non-Partisan League, of which the various local and state-wide labor and farmer-labor parties are completely autonomous bodies,” Stolberg shrewdly indicated. It is precisely this policy that offers dangers to the C.I.O. movement. The failure of the C.I.O. to organize genuine independent political action has cost the workers plenty. The strike-breaker, Martin L. Davey, governor of Ohio, was the Labor’s Non-Partisan League nominee only a year and half ago, despite the protests of many progressives, especially in the rubber workers’ unions. Dependence on the capitalist politicians takes a heavy toll in the organized labor movement. If the workers in the “Little Steel” strike had depended only on their own strength and power, aided by the union movement, they would not have been trapped by the Daveys and Earles in whom they had been told to have confidence. Stolberg apparently assents to the C.I.O. class-collaboration policies.
We do not.
 



Traveling through the main industrial centers of America during the past two months, when the Hitler seizure of Austria, the third Moscow trial and the acute economic crisis weighed heavily on the minds of the people, we were afforded an excellent opportunity to study the reaction to these significant events.
In the New England area with its many “ghost towns,” the main topic of conversation with union leaders was the critical situation in the newly-formed C.I.O. unions. The hammer blows of the depression, combined with the inexperience of the unionists, was creating havoc in the unions. Many were falling apart. Wage cuts, lay-offs and the miseries of unemployment and insecurity were facing most of the industrial workers, six years after they had backed Roosevelt and the New Deal as the hope of their salvation.
 
Attitude To Trials
A little incident in Philadelphia illustrated the reaction of the American workers to the third Moscow trial. Two workers were talking about Krestinsky’s repudiation of his confession and his subsequent retraction the next day.
“Hell, what else would you expect after the guy spent another night in Stalin’s jail. You’d talk plenty, too,” one of the workers said. Skepticism was prevalent everywhere, but little real interest was found. The workers were too occupied with their own pressing economic problems to worry much about another trial.
The political situation in Pennsylvania, complicated by the C.I.O.-A.F. of L. fight, has one amusing aspect, a railroad porter told the writer. “Last summer Governor Earle was our leader, and now we are supposed to vote against him,” he said. It was treason to the C.I.O. to criticize Earle’s strikebreaking actions in the Bethlehem strike a year ago. Now it is treason if you praise him.
 
Fight for Existence
The depths of the present crisis reflect themselves in the contrast between the state of the C.I.O. union movement of one year ago and today in the Ohio region. In those earlier days the name C.I.O. sounded invincible. The spirit of the workers soared sky-high. Today the unions are having a grim fight for existence. The defeat of the Little Steel strike and the mass lay-offs in the Mahoning valley steel region have been heavy blows. In Salem, Ohio, one steel lodge has maintained its strength. Its leadership is militant and progressive. It is free from Stalinist influence.
In Akron the impression is gained that another Goodyear strike is on. Headlines scream of the dispute between the United Rubber Workers and the companies. The radio is filled with pro or anti-union speeches. Peeling is as tense as during the critical moments of the Goodyear strike. The class struggle rages furiously.
Goodrich threatens to abolish 5,000 jobs unless wage cuts are accepted. Businessmen demand that the unions take the cuts. The rubber workers stand pat. The bosses cannot understand why all the anti-union propaganda has not smashed the U.R.W.A. Unless one has been through the strike and sit-down struggles, it is impossible to know how unionism has been burned into the souls of the gum-miners in the fires of picket lines.
 
Workers’ Control Needed
The rubber workers want jobs, decent wages, and security. The industry is only operating at 30 per cent. If it were running full blast, thousands would still be unemployed because of technological advances. Unions alone cannot solve the problems. There is but one answer to the rubber workers’ problems and most people are afraid to mention it: Workers’ control of production.
In Akron as in Lynn and other branches where the party’s main orientation is the trade union movement, one finds a different spirit among the comrades. They are working hard, they feel the
class struggle in their day to day activities, they drive forward despite many obstacles. They are confident of the future. Republic Steel opened a new plant in Cleveland the week we were there; 2,000 men will do the work of 16,000 and the steel will be of a higher quality in this modern factory. This example illustrates the entire problem of technological unemployment facing the union movement.
 
Characteristics of Detroit
Detroit is the center of three things today: the auto industry, the largest number of unemployed industrial workers in proportion to population, and the most ambitious program of the Stalinist party in America. The C.P. is concentrating its leading forces here in an effort to rule or ruin the United Automobile Workers of America. That leading red-baiter, Richard Frankensteen, first vice-president, is their candidate in the battle against Homer Martin, whose blast against the C.P. pro-war line has had a telling effect in the ranks of the auto workers.
Our party contains some very fine auto union militants. It has a great task ahead in this C.I.O. center. The comrades are working hard to overcome numerical weakness. In Detroit, hundreds and not tens are necessary to give the working class powerful leadership.
It was a pleasure to see “new” faces at the anti-war meetings the branches held in the middle-west. A young rubber worker joined the Y.P.S.L. in Akron after the rally. Some auto workers attended the Cleveland meeting. A Stalinist militant listened attentively at the Toledo meeting.
 
Stalinists Applaud
Sixty steel workers came to the Indiana Harbor anti-war gathering. Plenty of rank-and-file Stalinists were in the audience. The C.P. organizer took the floor. It was an exciting evening. The C.P. members applauded our attacks on the C.P. line!
The entire area around Chicago, heart of industrial America, presented a tragic picture of the plight of workers under capitalism. We went to the scene of the “Little Steel” strike massacre. One of our comrades still suffers from wounds sustained in leading the workers’ defense. The union never recovered from the defeat in that strike. Mass lay-offs were another blow. While the finest industrial plants in the world waste away, hundreds of thousands of workers exist in misery resulting from unemployment. The S.W.P. has its roots in a strong shop committee at a large plant. A young proletarian branch is active at Indiana Harbor.
The Stalinists in the United Electrical land Radio Workers in the Chicago region are having a tough time these days. Two locals adopted the anti-war resolution of the Minneapolis Central Labor Union. Young Chicago comrades are doing a good job there.
 
In Minneapolis
Minneapolis seemed different than the rest of the country. It is an exception. The Stalinists are conspicuous by their absence from the main stream of the labor movement. The unions are still on the march, while elsewhere in the country the unions are at best in strategic retreat. Watch Minneapolis for hot developments when many union contracts come up for renewal next month. The St. Paul branch did a real job in the recent primary and is an up-and-comer in party circles.
How did the workers and other people react to Hitler’s Austrian coup? We watched them read the newspapers intently at the factory gates before ringing the clock card. In movie houses, dead silence except for our boo was maintained as newsreels showed the Nazi seizure. The nightmare of another world war loomed before them. Pacifism and isolationism are very strong, conversations with union militants revealed everywhere, in the Middle West.
While it is a bit early in the middle-west for political campaigning, Labor’s Non-Partisan League has ambitious plans in Ohio and Michigan for the fall elections. The League is packed with Stalinists who fight viciously every attempt towards independent working-class political action. Advocacy of that slogan becomes “Trotskyism.”
Our conclusion from the tour was a simple one: Even greater emphasis on and attention to the immediate problems of the American workers and concentration on activity within the unions will help build our party along proletarian lines.
 



AKRON, Ohio. – The recent upsurge of the Akron labor movement received further impetus this week when 9,000 rubber workers completely shut down the six plants of the Goodrich Rubber Company.
Resentment over long-standing grievances at the Goodrich plants flared into a sit-down late last week in protest against seniority; violations among electricians. It immediately received factory-wide support and the next day large picket lines closed the shops.
 
All Grievances Up
L.L. Callahan, president of Local 5, United Rubber Workers of America, announced that the negotiating committee would use the opportunity to settle all major grievances. Negotiations were proceeding satisfactorily early this week.
The strike climaxed a series of victories over the past two weeks, which successfully stopped a vicious anti-labor offensive.
Recently the fight of progressive Goodrich unionists against wage-cut proposals received a 10 to 1 majority vote from the rank-and-file and inspired the entire Akron labor movement.
The report of the United States Department of Labor, which followed the vote by a few days, substantiated the claim of unionists that wage-cuts were unjustified. The company’s claim that decentralization was inevitable unless wages were reduced was exploded by these actions. However, it may be expected that Goodrich will attempt to decentralize some production to penalize the union for its militant stand.
 
Firestone Contract Renewed
The solidarity of rubber workers led to a renewal of the contract between the Firestone Company and the U.R.W.A. – a contract which included provisions for a standard six-hour day and maintenance of present wage scales.
Firestone broke the united employer front when it realized how costly the battle with the rubber workers would be.
“If Firestone signed, so can Goodrich!” progressive unionists declared in rallying Goodrich workers for direct action to settle grievances.
Successful settlement of a strike at the Sun Rubber Co. last week gave further incentive to the aroused Goodrich workers. Victorious strikes by Akron truck drivers, and waiters and waitresses, added fuel to the rekindled labor movement.
An “enthusiastic” welcome was given last week by hundreds of U.R.W.A. rank-and-filers to a Goodyear company-sponsored rally. Thunderous cheers greeted a company stooge as he mounted the rostrum. Two hours later, the militant audience was still cheering when the stooge descended from the platform in despair after being able to utter only a few words during the entire period.
The events are a remarkable tribute to the courage and solidarity of the rubber workers who lave withstood a series of union-busting attacks, ranging all the way from “red apple” propaganda to mass lay-offs which have made thousands destitute. The well-laid strike-breaking plans of the Greater Akron Association and the Chamber of Commerce have been punctured flatter than a worn out tire at the present time.
 
Union Position Better
Negotiators for the Goodrich union have been placed in a stronger position by the signing of the Firestone contract. Besides the six-hour day and no wage cuts, it includes vacations with pay – one week for five years’ service, two weeks for ten years, seniority rights guaranteed with no lay-offs until the work week has gone down to 24 hours, and the acceptance of the union’s grievance committee setup.
Goodrich this week issued secret orders to its office staff to consider this week of idleness as its vacation, indicating that the plant probably will not reopen until next Monday.
Because of this sign and the bitterness of management toward the union, the rubber workers are preparing for a prolonged strike, even though satisfactory negotiations are progressing.
The famous slogan of the five-week Goodyear strike – “Hold That Line!” – has been revived, showing that the gum miners are returning to their old tradition of militancy.
 



The grandiose scheme of the Richard Frankensteen-Earl Browder factions in the United Automobile Workers of America, to oust Homer Martin, international president, and to capture control of this great C.I.O. union suffered a set-back at the first session of the international executive board in Detroit this week.
Martin, took the bull by the horns when he announced at the session that he was abolishing the post of assistant president, which was Frankensteen’s job. This was the first test of opposition forces to Martin’s administration. Martin won.
 
C.P. Squirms
No sooner had Martin showed his strength by the aggressive stand he took in fighting his unprincipled enemies, than the Stalinists began squirming in an effort to avoid the boomerang created by their deal with Frankensteen.
William Weinstone, Stalinist commissar in the auto industry, declared, “Communists in the U.A.W., are making no move to oust Martin.” He forgot to add that only one month ago the Stalinists openly distributed 100,000 copies of a Daily Worker editorial branding Martin a “fascist,” who should be removed.
The shock in the ranks of auto unionists over the brazen deal between the Stalinists and that arch red-baiter in the auto unions, Frankensteen, aided Martin in exposing the reactionary role of the C.P. in the union movement.
 
Terms of Deal
This deal was exposed in the May 7 issue of the Socialist Appeal. Frankensteen was promised the presidency in place of Martin and also Stalinist support for achieving his ambition of becoming lieutenant-governor of Michigan if he would join forces with them against Martin.
Walter Reuther, executive board member, and former front man of the unity caucus, who carries a Socialist label, announced before the board session that he would not go along with the Frankensteen-Browder plans.
Only a few weeks previously, Reuther and other S.P. members received a bitter taste of Stalinist double-crossing when Victor Reuther, youngest of the three brothers, was defeated for the post of secretary-treasurer of the Michigan C.I.O. council, after the C.P. promised to support him at a meeting of the unity caucus. The Stalinists openly voted for Reuther’s opponent!
 
Reuther’s Role
While Walter Reuther refused to go along with the Frankensteen-Stalinist clique (he has been a bitter enemy of Frankensteen for two years) he apparently still tried to oppose Martin by another maneuver. He wanted George Addes, “neutral” secretary-treasurer of the union, to run for presidency in event Martin was kicked out, it was announced publicly. Apparently this proposal fell flat, judging by subsequent events.
The sham of Frankesteen’s slogan, “End factionalism” in the auto union, was evident to every active auto unionist who knows that the Stalinists, also “supporters” of this slogan, meet weekly in fraction meetings, and will continue to do so.
Recently, Martin appeared at a district council meeting in Detroit, and read the minutes of a Stalinist fraction meeting, thereby putting the crimps in maneuvers they had planned for that meeting.
 
C.P. Covering Tracks
Realizing that their ruthless and irresponsible factionalism is exposing them in the eyes of all militant workers, the Stalinists are trying to cover up their tracks through a belly-crawling retreat announced in the Daily Worker of May 10.
“The Central Committee (of the Stalinist Party) has forbidden its membership to organize fractions or act as a group within unions of the C.I.O.,” the Daily Worker claimed.
This announcement would be funny if it were not intended as a new cover for Stalinist maneuvers. What militant unionist in any C.I.O. union, auto, rubber, steel, or elsewhere, has not been invited to a Stalinist fraction meeting? How about the minutes of the fraction meeting that Martin exposed?
 
Rank and File Revolted
Again, the actions of the Stalinists in the present crisis in the United Automobile Workers only reveal the depths to which they have sunk. The hypocritical turns in their policy from week to week only emphasize the utter unscrupulousness of their methods in seeking to capture a union.
So revolting has become the policy of the Stalinist commissars (kindly note; the Central committee orders in New York a policy for unionists in Detroit) that the rank and file unionists who joined the Stalinist party have rebelled time and again. In Flint a whole fraction in the Fisher body plants rejected the Stalinist policy foisted from above. The fraction was “reorganized.”
 
New Deals Ahead
The statement of the “new turn” announced in the Daily Worker of May 10 should serve as a warning to all militants in the union. “Public” opposition to Martin has proven a boomerang. Watch then for undercover and underhanded moves, probably through C.P. agents in the Labor’s Non-Partisan League which has been flooded by Stalinists.
If the deal with Frankensteen fizzles completely, it only signifies that the Stalinists will intensify their efforts for more and bigger, deals, which bring them “fruitful” results.
Against these reactionary maneuvers, the rank and file unionists should exercise the greatest vigilance. The Stalinists were brought out into the open at this executive board session. Each of their future moves must be treated likewise. The life and future of the United Automobile Workers is at stake.
Homer Martin’s defense of the union from outside clique control was a real advance for the cause of progressive unionism in America and must be supported.
 



PITTSBURGH, Pa. – What is Homer Martin going to do at the convention? This was one of the most frequently asked questions. Best answer was that the auto workers’ president was an unpredictable man. It was generally agreed, however, that if anyone would create a stir at the convention, Martin was the man. Perhaps on the war referendum issue.
* * *
John Brophy, C.I.O. director, pulled the first boner of the convention. He announced there would be a meeting of the “paper industrial unions” Monday night. Whereupon a newspaperman asked, “did he mean the Stalinist-controlled unions?”
* * *
John L. Lewis looked perplexed and tired during his opening remarks. Even his denunciation of the Nazi persecution of Jews was delivered in a mild tone.
* * *
The Star-Spangled Banner was played for an introduction to the sessions. Nothing like trying to whip up patriotism before a pro-war policy is announced.
* * *
After Lewis’ plea for democracy and the bill of rights a rank and file member of the miners union told some visitors that his union had been trying to get that for fifteen years within the U.M.W.A. Many of the District officers are still appointed by Lewis. The rank and file wants to elect their own.
* * *
A little taste of what price the so-called socialists are going to pay for supporting the Stalinist-Lewis bloc in gaining control of the auto workers’ union was given to none other than Walter Reuther, international executive board member, and president of the West Side Local. He was NOT elected a delegate by the executive board. And you can imagine how much sympathy he will get from the rank and file who saw him help the Stalinists in their “rule or ruin” tactics.
Mr. Tucker P. Smith, another bright luminary of the alleged Socialist Party was a visitor to the convention. He, too, has felt the axe, according to reports. He was dismissed from the educational department of the auto workers.
* * *
The cut-and-dried character of the convention so far would have been changed and a much more thorough discussion of the question of labor unity would have resulted from the presence of the International Ladies Garment Workers Union. When a convention committee accidentally mentioned David Dubinsky’s name in connection with a report, the delegates laughed. He is viewed by many C.I.O. unionists as a man who was afraid or too uncertain to fight for his position on unity within the C.I.O.
* * *
The International Woodworkers paper, passed out to all delegates, carried an interesting story about the charges placed against George H. Arms, treasurer of Harry Bridges’ longshoremen’s union. It was claimed he was a “red-baiter.” The story revealed that Arms was recently re-elected to that post despite Bridges’ opposition.
* * *
The official explanation for the 4,000,000 membership figure given in the Lewis report was that “of course, it means both employed and unemployed.”
* * *
It was considered very unlikely that the Workers Alliance would be given a C.I.O. charter, despite the frantic under-cover efforts of the Stalinists who want to save themselves from complete exposure and bankruptcy in the unemployed field.
* * *
The notable absence of “outside” speakers of the LaGuardia, Murphy, and other “friends of labor” variety was explained by the desire of the C.I.O. top leadership to have less said about the bankruptcy of their “realistic” policy of working with the democratic and republican “progressives.”
Mr. John Strachey, “The big shot from England” (a Stalinist explained) was hanging around the convention autographing copies of his latest piece of Stalinist propaganda. Apparently the Stalinists had to go to England to get a “literary” name to impress their stooges at the C.I.O. convention.
Chief topic around the press table was “will the Stalinists take over the C.I.O.,” and “why don’t they pep this convention up so I have a hot story.”
* * *
Only Postal Telegraph messengers were allowed in the convention. Brophy explaining that a C.I.O. contract had been signed with that company while Western Union was fighting the C.I.O.
* * *
The importance of this convention was illustrated in one way by the presence of every well-known labor reporter. Over 50 journalists representing the world, labor and radical press were covering the sessions.
* * *
There is little direct rank and file representation at the convention. Executive boards of C.I.O. international unions, regional directors, and presidents of C.I.O. councils constitute the overwhelming majority of the delegates, who number 476.
* * *
The key men on every important committee are miners, devoted henchmen of the Lewis machine. The C.I.O. is certainly in his control, organizationally speaking, although the place is swarming with Stalinists. Of course, they do not seem to be worrying very much. The Lewis speech on democracy could have been given word for word by Browder. The only difference is that Lewis carries more weight.
* * *
In case any opposition should arise from the floor, the Lewis-miners machine alone controls over 2,500,000 votes. Add to that the Hillman votes (and he is an integral part of the Lewis bureaucracy) of 700,000, and the Stalinist votes of 500,000 (a good deal from paper unions) and you can see how much chance any opposition might have.
 



PITTSBURGH, P a. – John L. Lewis took undisputed control over the entire Congress of Industrial Organizations (C.I.O.) following the first national convention held by the industrial unions affiliated to that organization.
His election as president, and the heavy predominance of his personal supporters on the newly-constituted executive board of the C.I.O. assures Lewis of greater personal power than ever achieved by a single trade union leader in this country.
After the shadow-boxing between Lewis and the Stalinists over one clause in the constitution for the C.I.O. (described in last week’s Socialist Appeal) the convention was smoother than a session of Stalin’s central committee meeting. There simply wasn’t any opposition on any question of importance.
 
Stalinists Roughly Handled
The C.I.O. constitution doesn’t guarantee the right of political affiliation for members. However, Lewis was able to cut off any discussion on this question.
Lewis called Harry Bridges and Joe Outran, the big-guns of the Stalinists, to the stage after they mildly protested against the constitution provisions.
“I don’t like you and your gang around here. You can go to hell, as far as I’m concerned, and if you want to get licked, start something at this convention,” Lewis privately told Bridges and Curran.
Whereupon, the Stalinists returned to their places and kept as silent as a couple of children just spanked by their father. In order that no one else get any ideas of trying to discuss the constitution seriously, Lewis took the floor before the committee on this subject made its report.
“This is a simple and democratic constitution,” he explained to the doubters. “It isn’t going to be amended. You are going to vote on the committee recommendations ...” Lewis gently explained.
Everybody got the hint. Outside of a mild discussion on per capita tax, the constitution was adopted without a murmur.
Weapon Against Autonomy
Under the provisions of the constitution, the executive board can investigate any international or local affiliate and make a report to the convention, anytime it thinks an international union is not carrying out C.I.O. policies.
Thus two legal weapons have been given Lewis for a possible purge of political minorities. The first is the lack of a guarantee on political affiliation rights, the second is this clause which allows
Lewis to investigate unions, in the manner he did in auto. These are dangerous precedents for the labor movement.
Of course, a broader and more flexible interpretation of these vital clauses depends entirely on how much pressure the rank and file places on the executive board. It becomes a question of relationship of forces.
 
Stalinists Get Posts
Because the constitution provides for the executive board of the C.I.O. to be composed of one member from each affiliated national and international union and organizing committee – and Lewis insisted that the nominees be the president of each of the affiliates – fifteen Stalinists are on the board!
Joe Curran, of the National Maritime Union, was elected despite opposition from his own delegates, because Lewis personally interceded.
Bridges, Mervin Rathborne, Michael Quill, Lewis Merrill, are among the leading Stalinists who are on the board which is composed of 42 members.
 
But Lewis Controls
However, voting on the Board is on the basis of per capita payments of the union which the board member represents. This provision gives Lewis absolute control of the Board. He and Philip Murray and Sidney Hillman, alone have a majority of votes from coal, steel and textile and clothing! Besides, they are the executive officers whose actions are subject to review only twice a year by the Board which they control!
John Brophy, C.I.O. director, was dumped from the post of secretary which he temporarily occupied since the death of Charles P. Howard. James Carey, of the electrical and radio workers, was elected, since he is considered “safer” than Brophy by the C.I.O. leaders. Carey is known as a “fellow traveller” of the Stalinist line. C.I.O. leaders expect to “win him over.”
 
“Love-Feast” with Martin
In an effort to impress the public, Lewis approached Homer Martin, auto workers president, and urged him to participate actively in the convention, to show that the C.I.O. was united.
So Martin spoke on the resolution for observing collective bargaining agreements. He blamed the employers for the sit-downs but was far too sharp in his own criticism of sit-downs. Later on, Martin talked on the resolution to organize Ford.
The final touch was a charming love feast arranged by the auto workers executive board which saw Martin presenting Murray, Hillman and Lewis with watches for their “great services to the auto workers,” while the Stalinists cheered. Actually, neither Martin, nor Lewis nor the Stalinists believed the talk of unity and peace and the struggle behind the scenes is more bitter than ever.
This remarkable performance was followed by another event which, to put it mildly, was unusual. On a point of special privilege, Joe Curran arose and read a little speech prepared for him by Thomas Ray and Roy Hudson, Stalinist behind-the-scenes-men at the convention.
Curran pledged “undying loyalty,” etc., etc., to Lewis and Lewis made a public endorsement of Harry Bridges. Tit-for-tat ... while the workers suffer from the rule-or-ruin policies of the Stalinists.
 
No Politics at Convention
Conspicuous by its absence throughout the convention was talk on Labor’s Non-Partisan League and its role in politics. The recent election defeats have demoralized the C.I.O. leaders and they didn’t want to discuss politics.
Only one resolution endorsing the League was introduced. Before it was introduced, Eli L. Oliver, executive vice-president of the League spoke on the resolution, and was followed by Michael Quill. No discussion was called for, although various delegates wanted to speak, and the resolution was endorsed.
Another example of the caution of the C.I.O. leaders was their refusal to allow a Stalinist delegate to introduce a special resolution calling upon Roosevelt to run for a third term. The C.I.O. leaders ruled it out of order, not because they necessarily disagree with the idea, but because they are afraid Roosevelt won’t run and they’ll be left high and dry.
Participation in another “war for democracy” was pledged in a resolution adopted by the convention.
A series of reports on organizing drives in the South, and elsewhere were approved and the C.I.O. executive board urged to plan a large campaign for new members.
Support of Roosevelt’s war program was given in a special resolution. In fact, all political resolutions gave a pledge to American capitalism.
 



PITTSBURGH, Pa., Nov. 15. – The cut-and-dried character of the first session of the C.I.O. convention was broken on Tuesday when the major questions of labor unity and democracy within the C.I.O. came before the delegates for consideration.
After the Stalinist forces headed by Harry Bridges, West Coast C.I.O. director, Mervin Rathborne, of the Communications Union, and Joe Curran, of the National Maritime Union led a fifteen minute demonstration for John L. Lewis, they got a taste of the Lewis “democracy” that kicked them right in the face.
Shortly after the tune of “Lewis is our Leader, we shall not be moved,” died down, the constitutional committee reported on a proposed constitution for the C.I.O. Thomas Kennedy, secretary-treasurer of the miners’ union, acted as spokesman. Copies Not Available The C.I.O. top leadership tried to get a constitution passed by a verbal reading of it! No copies were given to delegates. Finally, pressure from the floor succeeded in postponing discussion until copies were printed.
Meanwhile, a dangerous clause was adopted in the constitution that gives Lewis a legal weapon for a possible purge of the political groups within the C.I.O., despite the weak-hearted opposition of Bridges and the others.
The clause reads, “to bring about the effective organization of the working men and women of America, regardless of race, creed, color or nationality, and to unite them for common action into labor unions for their mutual aid and protection.”
 
Jeopardizes Political Rights
The clause fails to guarantee the right of a C.I.O. unionist to belong to a political party of his own choosing. The absence of this vital safeguard was so obvious that Curran, Bridges and Rathborne urged the reconsideration of this clause privately with the committee.
The Stalinists wanted to make a deal which would guarantee them the right to exist within the C.I.O. Naturally, they weren’t concerned about the problem of other political minorities within the C.I.O.
However, Sidney Hillman, president of the Amalgamated Clothing Workers, who was acting as chairman, rode rough shod over their opposition.
The adoption of this clause has created the legal basis for wholesale expulsions of any minority political groups. It is in particular a club that John L. Lewis has over his Stalinist allies.
 
Right to Overthrow Leaders
A second dangerous provision, which has not yet been considered, gives the newly-formed C.I.O. executive board the right to intervene anytime in any international union affiliated to the C.I.O., when in the judgment of the board such intervention is necessary!
Not even the bureaucratic constitution of the A.F. of L. has such a dictatorial clause which wipes out autonomy of the inter-national unions. It would give the C.I.O. top leaders the right to enter into every situation like they did in the auto controversy!
The entire constitution as presented by the committee is a means whereby the Lewis-miners’ machine would absolutely control the entire C.I.O. from top to bottom. It remains to be seen if this provision can be defeated. The Lewis forces control the huge majority of votes. The hope of the progressives lies in exposing this bureaucratic maneuver and forcing a change.
 
Labor Unity
The question of labor unity was discussed for a half day following the presentation of a special report as a reply to the message of President Roosevelt urging labor peace.
The convention unanimously adopted the policy outlined by the committee. It reads,
“The C.I.O. states with finality that there can be no compromise with its fundamental purpose and aim of. organizing workers into powerful industrial unions, nor its obligation to fully protect the rights and interests of all its members and affiliated organizations.”
“The C.I.O. accepts the goal of unity in the labor movement and declares that any program for the attainment of such goal must embrace as an essential prelude these fundamental purpose and principles.”
 
C.I.O. Committed
This is a re-statement of the previous position held by the C.I.O. with one important difference. The goal of unity has been accepted as part of the C.I.O. program!
The tremendous applause given the Roosevelt message worried the Lewis clique, primarily because they feared a stampede for peace which would mean a trampling of the C.I.O. principle of industrial unionism for mass production industries.
The long discussion on the committee report was intended as “educational” talks to show the C.I.O. and A.F. of L. rank and file that the C.I.O. was for peace but not at the cost of sacrificing industrial unionism.
It was felt that the position adopted by the convention would gire the C.I.O. a stronger lever in negotiating with the A.F. of L. There was a general impression among delegates that resumption of negotiations with the A.F. of L. was in the offing.
* * *
PITTSBURGH, Pa., Nov. 14. – How strong the sentiment within C.I.O. ranks is for labor unity was illustrated by the reception given the Roosevelt message urging labor peace.
The demonstration that followed the reading of the Roosevelt message was the first real evidence of enthusiasm at the convention.
John L. Lewis immediately appointed a special committee to draft a reply to President Roosevelt. It was headed by Phillip Murray, vice-president of the C.I.O.
Among delegates there was more talk about peace with the A.F. of L. than any other subject. It was generally believed that one of the main purposes of this convention was to put on a show of strength to the A.F. of L. and the public.
 
Industrial Workers Convention
The C.I.O. convention is a somewhat unusual gathering. Its place in labor history as the first national convention representing mainly the industrial workers is assured. Its record of achievement is obvious. Lewis stated it succinctly when he declared in his 66 page report, “What the A.F. of L. in fifty-four years of existence couldn’t accomplish, the C.I.O. did in three years.”
There can hardly be any doubt that industrial unionism has been established permanently in the mass production industries. The C.I.O. claims of 4,000,000 members are perhaps a bit high, but it is very significant to hear of the new wave of union spirit growing among mass production workers who have recently been rehired. Undoubtedly, dues-collections are very low in the C.I.O. but the ideas for which it stands in the minds of the industrial workers are as firmly entrenched as ever.
 
Miners’ Machine Dominant
This convention is being run strictly as a John L. Lewis, miners’ union bureaucracy affair. Every important committee has as its key figures, a miners’ union official. Murray, Hillman and Lewis are the trimvirate who are determining the destinies of the C.I.O. at this convention.
Because of the firm control of this powerful machine over the convention, it is somewhat listless. Its opening session was presided over by Pat Fagan, miners’ union official. He praised John L. Lewis. Then Lewis spoke on “democracy” and made his pledge to support American imperialism during war in return for a few concessions.
For two hours in the afternoon session, Walter Smethurst, another miners’ official, and executive assistant to Lewis, read the lengthy report of the C.I.O. chairman to the convention. The day ended with the hearing of the Roosevelt message.
 
Stalinists Cheering Squad
The role of the Stalinists at the sessions has been to lead the cheering for the Lewis machine. It is quite apparent that Lewis is perfectly agreeable to their support and some of their ideas, but he is going to keep organizational control of the C.I.O. in the hands of his machine.
Since very few of the 476 delegates are rank and file workers, the attitude of the membership to the C.I.O. policies is not receiving clear expression at the convention.
The future program of the C.I.O. as outlined by Lewis in his report which was accepted without any discussion by the convention is merely an extension of that already being carried out.
The C.I.O. top leaders are desperately trying to reform capitalism. Legislation for a ‘little more social security, for higher, wages, for preservation of the Wagner Act, for a housing program, for a “guarantee” of civil liberties. These are the immediate demands of the C.I.O. All of them deserve critical support, of course.
 
Major Issues Evaded
But the huge problem of unemployment, which the convention recognized in the report, has not been discussed nor is it likely that any serious discussion will develop.
The announcement of General Motors of its “income security” plan caught the C.I.O. leaders flat-footed. Although it is imperative that the convention adopt more progressive proposals for a sliding scale of hours and a rising scale of wages to answer fake company plans of “security” it is improbable that the questions will receive consideration.
On every question facing the workers today, the C.I.O. convention recognizes the problem but has no answer except vague generalizations about the need for adequate legislation, security and other phrases. Civil liberties are being trampled, the Lewis report pointed out. But how the workers can fight for their rights is not shown. How Mayor Frank Hague and other fascist-minded leaders can be stopped is not indicated.
The “swing to the right” in the recent elections worries the C.I.O. leaders. They know that even the program of mild reform legislation which they want stands little chance of passing under the present relationship of forces. However, they are afraid to take steps which would arouse the militancy of the workers ant through class action force Congress to give concessions to the labor movement.
 
“Honeymoon” Days Over
It is this dilemma which they cannot answer. The “honeymoon” days of the C.I.O. are over. Bitter opposition to every move of the C.I.O. is admitted by all. The Lewis report said “it (the opposition) was not understandable.” This is so only because he refuses to recognize the existence of the class struggle. He fails to understand that in a period of declining capitalism, the bosses relentlessly fight against every manifestation of labor solidarity and seek to destroy the union movement.
Fortunately, American workers have a great experience behind them in the organizing drives and sit-down strike wave that build the C.I.O. It is very probable that the C.I.O. workers in action will work out more progressive policies to meet the great problems of today than will the C.I.O. convention.
In the fact that this C.I.O. convention shows little if any signs of the hide-bound conservatism which marked the A.F. of L. convention, is the hope of the American labor movement. New ideas, flexible tactics, and response to social conditions will be manifest quicker in the C.I.O. than in the A.F. of L.
 
Skate Around Politics
The noticeable lack of “political” talk at this convention is another illustration of the sensitivity of the C.I.O. to social changes. Before the convention began, Lewis announced the need for “reforming” the Democratic Party in view of the election defeats. He criticized “fake liberals and New Dealers.” He even mentioned the possibility of a labor party development.
His speech was an admission of the bankruptcy of the present policy of Labor’s Non-Partisan League of supporting capitalist party candidates. His mention of labor party politics was a concession to a growing sentiment: for an independent working class party.
Again, however, the C.I.O. leaders fear to break with the Democratic machine. Yet they know the futility of “playing ball” with the bourgeois politicians. And they don’t want too much discussion of the question at this convention. That is why no political figures have been invited to attend. That is why the Lewis report says nothing about labor in politics.
 



PITTSBURGH, Pa – The C.I.O. convention here will mark an important milestone in the history of the American labor movement.
It will be the first time that the mass production workers are overwhelmingly represented at a national labor convention. The C.I.O. is based primarily on the industrial workers. The future course of the industrial workers will largely be determined by the policies adopted at this convention.
The burning issue of labor unity looms in the forefront of the questions this convention must answer. The danger of war, the growth of incipient American fascism, the need for independent political action, the unemployment question; these are the major problems demanding a solution if the workers are to go forward.
 
Stalinist Issue Decisive
Will the C.I.O. convention consider its most serious internal weakness: the treacherous influence of the Stalinist “rule or ruin” clique? Allied closely with this question is the problem of democracy within the C.I.O. itself. It must if the C.I.O. workers are to be free to determine their own destiny.
How the C.I.O. convention will deal with these problems is reflected in the pre-convention moves of John L. Lewis and the top leadership.
An imposing facade of strength is being carefully built by Lewis to impress the A.F. of L. and the general public. Startling figures of membership will be revealed. The S.W.O.C., for example, will report over 500,000 members, although this is a higher figure than claimed at the peak of the C.I.O.
 
New Unity Bid
The C.I.O. will make another bid for unity with the A.F. of L. on less intransigent terms than one year ago. The actions of international unions like the rubber workers, auto workers, etc., the actions of state C.I.O. councils urging unity, will set the tone for the convention.
Considerable speculation has arisen here over reports that Lewis will resign as C.I.O. chairman as a maneuver to win more support in unity negotiations with the A.F. of L.
Absence of the International Ladies Garment Workers Union is expected although its executive board does not meet until Nov. 10 to consider the question. Its presence here would have a tremendous influence for labor unity.
 
Bureaucratic Preparations
The convention is being prepared in the usual John L. Lewis fashion. Its bureaucratic structure will be similar to that of the A.F. of L. convention. The S.W.O.C. union will be represented by Murray, and five other miners’ union top leaders, along with four steel workers who are close associates of the Murray ruling faction. The voting strength of the convention will be concentrated in the hands of international union executive boards, C.I.O. regional directors, etc.
A caucus meeting of top C.I.O. officials has been called for Nov. 11 to plan the strategy of the convention.
The full nature of the deal between John L. Lewis and the Stalinists will be revealed at this convention. Is the war referendum amendment, approved by the S.W.O.C. convention and the U.A.W.A., going to be made a C.I.O. stand, or will the Stalinists with Lewis’ assistance tie the workers to the Roosevelt war-machine?
All indications are that Lewis and the top leadership will continue the fatal policy of relying on Roosevelt, and trying to keep the workers bound to the Democratic party.
 
Disrupters Want Recognition
The Stalinist controlled Workers Alliance wants a national C.I.O. charter to save itself from the consequences of its own ruinous policies. Progressive unionists want the C.I.O. to charter its own unemployed union, excluding these misleaders.
If the pressure of the rank and file throughout the country is sufficiently strong, the progressive proposal will carry. Otherwise another Stalinist noose will be placed around the neck of the C.I.O. workers.
The autonomy of international unions within the C.I.O. is also placed in jeopardy by the Lewis plan of centralization of control within the C.I.O. Already he controls the miners and the steel workers union. The Stalinists aided him in taking over the auto workers union.
 
The Main Issue
A dominant Lewis-Stalinist bloc based on their common determination to prop up the cracking edifice of capitalism, and to keep the workers from taking the road of class action on the economic and political field will spell the doom of the C.I.O.
Against this possibility, the progressives within the C.I.O. are fighting with the program of the Los Angeles Trade Union conference. Unity with the A.F. of L., no jurisdictional raids, for defense of workers’ rights by class action, for independent political action, and for the repudiation of the Stalinist ruinous policies.
Insofar as the C.I.O. convention adopts this program will its future course be progressive and benefit the interests of the industrial workers.
The next week here will reveal which policy the C.I.O. will adopt.
 



AKRON, Ohio. – Disgusted with the misleadership of the Stalinists in control of the Workers Alliance, the Akron C.I.O. council voted to organize W.P.A. workers into a C.I.O.-chartered union, and an organizing committee was set up in cooperation with the regional C.I.O. office to do the work.
This action followed widespread criticism of the Workers Alliance leadership by militant rubber workers now employed on W.P.A. projects. The Stalinists’ policy of doing nothing to embarrass the Roosevelt administration caused the criticism.
 
C.I.O. Calls Meet
A meeting called by the C.I.O. organizing committee for W.P.A. workers was held last week, despite sabotage of the Stalinists who spread false rumors that the organizing campaign was called off.
An apparently reliable report was received here from Washington that John L. .Lewis had definitely vetoed the proposal advanced by leaders of the Workers Alliance to give them an international C.I.O. charter. The word is being passed along in C.I.O. circles that Lewis wants to organize the unemployed and the W.P.A. people but is anxious to exclude the Stalinist leadership.
The effect of the C.I.O. council action in Akron is to place the Stalinists in the position of fighting a progressive proposal of the labor movement to make the battle of the unemployed its own, and they are meeting the opposition of most of the prominent Akron labor leaders.
 



TRENTON, N.J. – The third annual convention of the United Rubber Workers of America held here last week was marked by considerable achievements on many important trade union questions and a solidarity and union democracy that sets an example for other C.I.O. unions.
Unity of the C.I.O. and the A.F. of L. on the basis of recognition of industrial unionism for mass production industries and inclusion of the railroad brotherhoods in the united labor movement was called for in a resolution adopted unanimously at the convention.
Pledge of a strong fight against any modification of the Wagner Labor Act and against adoption of a British Labor Disputes act was made by the U.R.W.A.
 
Support Railroad Unions
Support of the United Rubber Workers to the railroad brothehoods in their battle against an impending wage cut was also pledged.
Among the most important achievements of the past year recorded in the officers’ reports was the smashing of a wage cut drive in Akron at the Goodrich plant which prevented a nationwide slash. Likewise the U.R.W.A. reported signed contracts with U.S. Rubber, Goodrich and Firestone, three of the largest concerns in America.
Membership of the U.R.W.A. had remained high despite layoffs of 25,000 union men in the past year who are still considered in the union, due to special provisions made in the constitution. Refuse Endorsement to Bridges
The convention refused to approve a Stalinist resolution calling for endorsement of Harry Bridges’ West Coast union-wrecking policies and for repudiation of the progressive Los Angeles Trade Union Conference which includes U.R.W.A. locals.
The delegates unanimously turned down a proposal to hold conventions biennially instead of yearly. “We want to check our officials yearly. We don’t want any auto workers situation,” they explained in debate.
The convention rebuked a Stalinist delegate from Akron who was a delegate from another local by voting not to permit the practice in the future, unless the delegate was first elected from his own local. “Who paid her way here,” a Goodrich worker asked.
Three attempts inspired by the Stalinists to enlarge the executive board so that election of a Stalinist would be assured were defeated by the progressives in the convention.
 
Still Follow F.D.R.
Everything looked rosy for the Stalinist clique when the convention first began. The great majority of delegates were Roosevelt followers and the Stalinists hopped on the band-wagon cheering as over 75 resolutions were passed in less than two hours in support of the “New Deal.”
Only argument was on the question of praising Roosevelt in the resolution calling for him to run on a third term. Some delegates said he was the greatest president, others argued he was no greater than Lincoln or Jefferson and should only be called one of the greatest. With debate proceeding along that fashion, a few progressives didn’t take the floor to speak against Roosevelt’s policies.
The national C.I.O. policy of playing around with Democrat and Republicans and the C.I.O position on labor unity was outlined in speeches by Allan S. Hay wood, New York C.I.O. director John Brophy, national C.I.O. director, Eli P. Oliver, executive vice-president of Labor’s Non-Partisan League, and other speakers.
Knowing the militant and democratic traditions of the rubber workers, Brophy in his speech did not dare to use the language he used on the West Coast recently in seeking to cover up Bridges stacked C.I.O. state convention although the West Coast rubber workers were staring him in the face and had passed out a well-documented booklet exposing Bridges and Brophy to the U.R.W.A. Delegates.
 
Blast Mayor Hague
Other resolutions called for support of Labor’s Non-Partisan League, blasting of Mayor Frank Hague and fascist tendencies in U.S.A., criticism of the Dies committee, etc., etc.
Of special importance was the lengthy discussion on organizing in the South, in particular at Gadsden, Ala., where Goodyear’s two-year reign of terror has resulted in vigilante attacks against unionists. Gadsden is the Achilles heel of Goodyear Local in Akron, and a special five-point organizing campaign was recommended to the executive board for action. The constitution was amended to provide for even more union democracy, and a special provision was included that at no time should organizers comprise a majority of the executive board. This provision was a compromise over a Goodrich Local proposal that no organizer should serve on the board. “We don’t want to allow anyone to build a machine in the union through posts,” the delegates declared. It was in this way that the delegates time and again showed they are determined to keep the U.R.W.A. as a democratically run union, and certainly the convention was an excellent illustration of that democracy.
The Stalinists interrupted the proceedings here to introduce their factional resolution in support of Bridges, and for condemning the West Coast delegates who had passed out the booklet exposing the Stalinist “rule or ruin” policy. A brilliant answer to this proposal was made by George Burden, West Coast delegate, who outlined the Bridges’ maneuvers and their disastrous consequences.
 
Praise Western Organizer
Then S.H. Dalrymple, international president, took the floor and contrary to reports published in the Daily Worker, criticized the Stalinist-introduced resolution as one “which breaks the unity and harmony of this convention,” and he told the delegates that the executive committee had agreed not to bring the subject up at the convention. So the resolution was squelched by a motion to table indefinitely which passed by a huge majority.
Later in the convention, the West Coast delegates introduced a motion praising the work and policies of George B. Roberts, U.R.W.A. western organizer, who had previously been criticized for blasting Bridges, and this motion passed unanimously, as the C.P. crawled into a hole to hide.
Frightened by the turn of events, the Stalinists rushed to get Michael Quill, Transport Workers’ U ni o n president and “party line” follower, down as speaker but his clever speech proved of no avail.
The legislative committee report included recommendations for extension of the Social Security Law to provide for benefits to W.P.A. workers, endorsement of the Civil Liberties Committee work, favored a low-rent housing program, condemnation of use of the National Guard in strikes, and opposition to laws conscripting capital in war-time since “this would lead to drafting of labor to which we are unalterably opposed.” These were passed.
 
Officers Re-Elected
The present officers, Dalrymple, vice-president Thomas F. Burns, and secretary-treasurer Frank Grillo, were unanimously re-elected.
In the elections for executive board two surprises came when N.H. Eagle and Salvatore Came-lio, organizers and founders of the union, were defeated for re-election. Part of this was because of the feeling delegates had against having organizers on the board and part of it was their reputation for playing too close to the Stalinists. John Marchiando, another board member and organizer, also suffered defeat.
In their place were elected Scott Friess, a progressive from the U.S. Rubber plant in Indiana, G.T. Palmer, of Barberton, who also has a progressive reputation, and C.V. Wheeler, of Goodyear Local, who is not very well known but follows the Stalinist party line.
L.S. Buckmaster, president of Firestone Local, and outstanding for his work at the convention, got the highest vote for re-election; L.L. Callahan, president of Goodrich Local and a well-known Akron labor leader was re-elected, and Walter J. Welsch, representing the small locals, was returned to the executive board.
In all localities the U.R.W.A. had fought for adequate W.P.A. projects and higher wages, and is doing its best to keep the burden of the crisis from falling on the workers. Although the financial condition was not very good, the International Union could obtain $100,000 from the C.I.O., if needed, Grillo said.
 



WASHINGTON. D. C. – The struggle between the top leaderships of the C.I.O. and the A.F. of L. for the dominating position in possible unity negotiations for the labor movement were revealed this week in three developments.
John L. Lewis announced that the C.I.O. would hold a national convention in Pittsburgh on November 14 to set up a permanent organization on a nationwide scale.
A proposal was made by Heywood Broun, president of the C.I.O. American Newspaper Guild, to President Roosevelt that he create a fact-finding board which could study the C.I.O.-A.F. of L. dispute and then lay the basis for peace.
 
I.T.U. Admitted
The A.F. of L. convention at Houston, Texas, admitted the International Typographical Union on a six-months probationary period despite the refusal of the union to assess itself for a contribution to the A.F. of L. “war chest” against the C.I.O.
Setting up of a national C.I.O. organization does not necessarily mean a wider split in the labor movement. It is primarily a defensive measure of the C.I.O. which Lewis hopes will give him more power and prestige in any possible negotiations with the A.F. of L.
The Broun proposal, coming right on the heels of President Roosevelt’s message to the A.F. of L. convention urging peace, without question was Lewis-inspired and indicates that the C.I.O. is anxious to place further pressure on A.F. of L. leaders for resumption of negotiations.
The action of the A.F. of L. convention towards the typographical union shows that Green-Frey & Co. intend to pursue a “smarter” course in the future in dealing with C.I.O. sympathizers within the A.F. of L.
 
Roosevelt’s Role
A very grave danger exists in the role that Roosevelt has assumed in regard to the feud between the C.I.O. and the A.F. of L. and his intercession in the matter can have disastrous consequences for the independence of the American labor movement.
Roosevelt sent a commission abroad this summer to study English and Swedish labor conditions primarily because he wanted to orient American public opinion toward support of similar proposals in America. Even before his commission sailed abroad Roosevelt knew the facts of labor conditions abroad, but he wanted publicity for those ideas.
The second step in Roosevelt’s strategy is to appear as the friend, counselor and mediator in the dispute in the “family of labor.” Public opinion will be molded, and considerable union support obtained, for Roosevelt’s proposed actions whatever he may decide.
And what could be sweeter for Roosevelt’s war plans, and for his national prestige in middle-class circles, than to have him sponsor and obtain through Congress legislation forcing labor “unity” on a basis similar to provisions in the British Labor Disputes Act.
 
An Imposed Peace
Roosevelt can and will, unless the labor movement itself makes peace, force peace on a reactionary basis by the argument, “America has stood long enough for the quarrel in the family of labor. We can not allow two children to continually jeopardize the welfare of the nation through their squabbling. Public opinion says they should be spanked,” etc. etc. etc.
Under the guise of outlawing “jurisdictional” disputes (C.I.O.-A.F. of L.) as in England, Roosevelt can hog-tie the American labor movement through his own interpretations of the clause. Yet he could easily sell the idea of outlawing jurisdictional disputes by the fake arguments: “We merely want to protect labor from hurting itself through unnecessary and stupid feuds, and we want to prevent any injustice to the employer who is the innocent bystander.”
Roosevelt wants “national unity” in time of war. And the recent events in Europe revealed how quickly war can come. Roosevelt knows labor “unity” is indispensable to “national unity.”
Of equal importance to the new role of Roosevelt towards labor unity is the significance of the coming C.I.O. Convention.
 
The Main Issue
John L. Lewis and the entire C.I.O. now have to face squarely the following question. Will the American workers run the C.I.O. or is Lewis giving control of the C.I.O. to the Stalinists by making a bloc with them?
Who shall run the C.I.O.? That is the question which Lewis cannot avoid answering publicly at the national convention.
Reports from Washington say that Lewis is alarmed at the tremendous strides the Stalinists have made towards capturing the C.I.O. He had not bargained for that much when he made a deal to place Stalinists as organizers in return for unqualified support. Lewis does not want to become a captive of the Stalinists but the danger exists. Two years ago Lewis tried to take over the auto workers’ union by the device of an Auto Workers Organizing Committee which was rejected by the founding convention. Yet the Stalinists succeeded where he failed, and Lewis knows it.
 



NEWARK, N.J. – A strong desire for unity with the A.F. of L. was the outstanding sentiment at the two-day convention of C.I.O. unions here that set up a state-council.
A spirited demonstration followed the unanimous approval of a resolution calling for unity, and the delegates instructed the newly-formed state executive committee to attempt to coordinate the activities of the C.I.O., the A.F. of L., and the railroad brotherhoods in the state.
 
Plan Fight on Hague
The fight against Mayor Hague was another main theme of the convention. The Steel lodges introduced a very good resolution on how to struggle properly against the Hague machine. It emphasized the need for more independent action and self-reliance by the labor movement. The struggle against Hague was a major topic in Carney’s report to the convention. These ideas were embodied in a recommendation to the incoming executive board.
The confidence of the workers in the battle to organize Jersey City, Hague’s strong-hold, was strikingly revealed in the action to hold the next convention in that city.
W.J. Carney, New Jersey C.I.O. director, was unanimously elected president of the state organization.
Using the provision that all international unions at the convention be represented on the executive board, the Stalinists were able to pack a majority on that body through inclusion of men from unions like the architects, office workers etc. However, the executive officers are nearly all non-Stalinist.
Real power in the new set-up is the Hillman group from the Amalgamated Clothing Workers, and the national C.I.O. through W.J. Carney.
The main line of division in the convention came over the question of either appointing or electing an executive secretary who will naturally head the work of the state organization.
A bloc between the progressive steel workers and the delegates from the Dyers Federation ably led by Joseph Knapick, their president, fought for election of that officer. The Stalinists wanted appointment since they hoped to squeeze in Len Goldsmith, of the Newspaper Guild, who had acted as convention secretary. The Amalgamated delegates wanted appointment because they know that Hillman has a candidate in mind.
 
Force Apology
After a stupid and provocative speech by Al Barkin, Stalinist from the textile workers, that turned the convention into an uproar when he hinted that the steel-dyers bloc was using “Hague arguments about democracy,” quiet was restored and a good discussion followed with a majority voting for appointment. The Stalinist was forced to apologize. It remains to be seen if a qualified unionist will obtain the post or if the Stalinists will put in a stooge.
Although two unions presented resolutions calling for the transformation of Labor’s Non-Partisan League into a Labor party now, parliamentary rules were used to break off serious discussion and a resolution endorsing the present League policy passed by a large majority.
 
Discuss War Question
Lengthiest discussion came on the war question. The resolutions committee recommended a Stalinist “Endorse the Kellogg-Peace pact” resolution. Two unions introduced an anti-imperialist war resolution that also called for a popular referendum on war.
Attempts of the Stalinists to heckle and boo the opposition were quickly stopped by Carney who insisted on democratic discussion, and debate followed. The Stalinists had a large majority in the vote.
Soon after the convention opened and a progressive delegate fought against a Stalinist measure, the credentials committee, under their guidance, voted to unseat him. The bloc of steel and dyers delegates along with all other non-Stalinists got ready to expose this maneuver if the credentials committee went through with its plan, so Carney and other top C.I.O. officials squelched the C.P. move.
 



DETROIT – A demand that the national executive board of the CIO meeting in Washington on July 18 adopt the essential features of the GM strike program as a guiding policy for all CIO unions is to be presented by Walter P. Reuther, UAW-CIO president. The GM strike program proposed higher wages without price increases.
This announcement was made at the wage conference of delegates from all Chrysler locals, who voted to authorize a strike to eliminate bad working conditions and the speedup and also to reopen wage negotiations to meet the rising cost of living.
In addition, the international executive board of the UAW-CIO authorized a strike of 18,000 workers of the Briggs Manufacturing Corporation after two months of negotiations failed to settle speedup, pay docking, seniority, wage differentials and reinstatement of discharged workers. Both the Briggs and Chrysler plants in the past few weeks have been the scene of many slowdowns and spontaneous walkouts, which are an indication of the mass discontent developing in the auto industry.
 
Resurgence of Militancy
Three factors are responsible for the resurgence of militancy among the auto workers. They are, first, bad working conditions, centering around issues like ventilation, etc.; second, the auto companies systematically are introducing speedup in an effort to gain more productivity per man and thus actually cutting wages. The third factor, one that has hit every worker in America, is, of course, the sky-rocketing cost of living that has wiped out wage gains previously won in militant struggle in the auto and other industries.
Realization that this problem is not solely one of the auto workers and that the auto workers should not be left alone in spearheading the American labor movement, has brought more support to the excellent idea that the GM program be a national CIO policy. Time and again Reuther and his associates insist that contracts must be negotiated on the basis of higher wages without an increase in prices and that higher wages must come from profits and must not be passed on to consumers.
There is no indication as to what reception this program is going to meet at the national CIO board meeting. At the Chrysler conference, the Stalinist bloc turned down a resolution to support this program and substituted instead a resolution to reopen negotiations on wages. The fact that R.J. Thomas, opponent, of Walter Reuther, is sitting on the national CIO executive board as a CIO vice-president representing the auto workers, rather than Reuther, is hardly an indication that Reuther can expect a favorable response from Murray.
Of course, Reuther’s fight on this program will have at least this result – it must bring some statement from Philip Murray on national CIO policy. For the last two weeks in the crisis of OPA, the American labor movement has been confronted with the amazing spectacle of absolute silence from Philip Murray. This is tantamount to an admission of bankruptcy by Murray and his associates on meeting the issues around the rising cost of living, inflation and the whole problem of a national CIO wage policy.
Murray’s formula for settling the steel strike (higher wages by allowing the steel industry higher profits to be passed on to the consumer) has been exposed as disastrous to the labor movement. The inability of the GM workers to get higher wages without higher prices was caused mainly by Murray’s settlement of the steel strike on his inadequate formula. The auto workers are determined not to permit this to happen again.
In the coming struggles in the auto industry, the UAW-CIO wants CIO backing for the progressive policy of higher wages without price increases. By the end of the session of the national CIO executive board, it will be shown whether the CIO takes a step forward or a step backward on this vital question.
 



DETROIT, July 30 – Another crucial meeting of the International Executive Board of the UAW-CIO is to be held on August 5 to take up major questions of policy and organizational matters.
Before the board will be two diverging sets of proposals for adoption by the UAW-CIO as its official policy to meet the inflationary crisis in this country.
One rounded-out plan will represent the point of view of Walter P. Reuther, union president, and another will be the program advocated by the Stalinist Party through its supporters on the board, headed by George Addes, union secretary-treasurer.
On the question of wage increases, the Stalinists now are making considerable agitation for reopening of wage negotiations with all big auto corporations.
 
Reuther’s New Formula
Until this week Walter Reuther was also speaking along those lines, but following a series of conferences with Philip Murray, CIO president, Reuther has virtually abandoned for the moment the GM program of fighting for wage increases without price increases.
The formula which Reuther presented to a caucus meeting and which was accepted enthusiastically by his followers was: “We must make the dollar mean more. We’ve got to keep prices down. That is the main job now.”
This formula is essentially the same miserable policy statement which the national CIO Executive Board issued at its recent session in Washington.
As part of this “strategy,” Reuther issued a call to the auto manufacturers to meet with the UAW-CIO to discuss the problem of full production. No one, of course, thought that the auto barons would take this invitation seriously. Naturally, Reuther has another “plan” to present which is expected again to create nationwide publicity and discussion. What Reuther’s plans are remains to be seen.
The fact that the entire top leadership of the UAW-CIO has gone along with Reuther in his latest moves does not indicate agreement among them, but rather the usual “playing politics,” for the factional struggle in the UAW-CIO is increasing in intensity.
The “militant” demands of the Stalinists now are, of course, a tactic to gain influence and prestige among the rank and file. More exactly, to cut into the widespread support Reuther won on the basis of the real militant GM program that made him president of the union.
In practice, all elements in the union are working together on the struggle to keep prices down by means of buyers’ strikes, special demonstrations, use of flying squadrons to prevent evictions, etc. In some respects, the activities on this problem are healthy competition between the Reuther forces and the Stalinist bloc.
Nor will the dispute in the Executive Board come to a clear difference on wage policy in general. At the national CIO board meeting, the divergent elements agreed on a general statement which means something different to each force in the CIO in concrete practice.
In the UAW-CIO, the burning issue on which ambiguity will be difficult will be the request of the Chrysler conference that wage negotiations be reopened as permitted by the contract, provided a 60-day notice of intention is filed. The decision of the UAW-CIO Executive Board on this crucial situation will indicate the real policy of the union leadership and the factions in the next period.
 



DETROIT, July 1 – Behind the sensational reports that George Addes, secretary-treasurer of the UAW-CIO, and Richard T. Leonard, vice-president, held a secret caucus meeting of their supporters and planned a purge of all Communist Party members in the UAW and the subsequent denial by these two officials of any such plan lies a significant development within the CIO.
Early this week the reports came from Washington that Addes and Leonard had pledged Philip Murray, CIO president, that they would purge the Stalinists; and that they had held a secret meeting of twenty UAW local presidents who support them and had promised that a real break with the Stalinists was coming.
The fact that Walter Reuther, UAW-CIO president, won such a smashing victory at the recent Michigan CIO State convention caused a crisis in the anti-Reuther bloc within the UAW.
 
Stalinist Coup
The Reuther victory was made easier by the fact that within the anti-Reuther bloc, the Stalinists boldly took over organizational control of the bloc and put up their slate against the Reuther slate. For example, the notorious Stalinist hatchetman, Nat Ganley of Local 155, was a candidate for vice-president on the anti-Reuther slate. Tracy Doll, prominent UAW official, was replaced as chairman of the caucus by John Anderson, another admitted Communist Party member. Then came the defeat and then the dissatisfaction.
So a secret meeting was called by twenty union presidents who support either Leonard, Addes or R.J. Thomas, which brought up the whole question of the role of the CP. Leonard, a right winger, urged a break with the Stalinists, while Addes remained silent. Leonard is rapidly changing his position and it would not surprise anyone if he ended up in Reuther’s camp.
The Detroit newspapers came out with sensational stories about the secret meeting, and said Addes was breaking with his Stalinist collaborators. No one in the Reuther camp, however, took this report seriously.
 
Deny Purge
Late this week, Addes and Leonard and a spokesman for R.J. Thomas issued statements denying a purge, but insisting that no political party would be permitted to dominate the union. The statements represent a tactical retreat on the part of Addes, for they make it much more difficult for him to function as closely as before with the Stalinists.
It represents a serious rift in the anti-Reuther camp and does indicate that the Stalinists will lose some of their influence in the UAW. It represents a partial victory for Reuther since it is an admission by his opposition that he has a sound view of the impossibility of permitting the Stalinists to play a dominating role in the union movement because they are merely using the unions as pawns for Russian foreign policy.
Later this week, another meeting of West Side presidents in the Addes- Leonard-Thomas camp is supposed to be held. The fact that anyone known as a Stalinist is excluded from these two meetings signifies the extent of the rift within the anti-Reuther camp. A new program has been promised by Addes-Leonard, but this too is to be taken with a large grain of salt.
The full significance of the rift will be revealed in the August meeting of the UAW-CIO Executive Board, where Reuther is expected to make a last bid for support before going to the ranks openly and perhaps calling a special convention of the union to support his program.
 



One of the significant developments on the question of a veterans’ bonus occurred least week in Michigan at the special session of the state legislature called to take up the matter of a state bonus for Michigan veterans.
There was little doubt in anyone’s mind that the special session would vote overwhelmingly to approve a state bonus. The Michigan plan calls for a bonus of $10 a month for every month a soldier spent in the states, and $15 a month for each month of overseas duty, up to the maximum of $500 for any veteran. Other provisions take up problems of surviving dependants, etc.
The Michigan plan involves payment of around $270,000,000 or an average of about $280 per veteran. It goes before the voters of the state for approval in November, since the Michigan constitution provides that such an expenditure must be made by constitutional amendment via referendum vote.
Of course, there is nothing new in the idea of a state bonus. Massachusetts and Illinois already have approved of the idea, and the Massachusetts veterans already have been paid.
What is significant in the Michigan state bonus development is the attitude of the veterans organizations and, in particular, the UAW-CIO veterans committees. In other states the cost of the state bonus is financed by a sales tax in one form or another.
An attempt was made in Michigan to propose a sales tax on cigarettes and beer to meet the cost of the bonus.
None of the veterans organizations except the AVC had anything to say on this vital question. The AVC said that it was against any “regressive taxation.”
But the UAW-CIO veterans delegation had plenty of say on the subject. Many speakers at the public hearings denounced any attempt to foist a sales tax on the common people to pay a bonus. Attempts to get the CIO vets to approve payment of the bonus from the present three per cent sales tax failed. The UAW-CIO vets said they were against all sales taxes. George Buckley of the UAW-CIO vets department told the legislators that the CIO wanted to abolish the present sales tax.
 
UAW Plan
The CIO vets had proposals, however, for financing a “wage adjustment,” as they called the bonus. A tax on corporation profits, on high incomes, and similar taxes to hit the rich were suggested by the CIO veterans.
Naturally the legislators ducked this “hot potato.” The November vote will not include any proposal on the financing of the bonus except that a special bond issue will be made to permit payment of the bonus.
But the UAW-CIO veterans gave every indication that their struggle for a real bonus, not one paid for by themselves or organized labor, or the working people in general, has just begun. The hopes of the Republican and Democratic politicians that they could buy the veterans votes received a serious setback because of the attitude of the UAW-CIO veterans.
In the coming struggle for a federal bonus, in which the UAW-CIO veterans can be expected to play a big role, the skirmish in Michigan is a good starting point and an excellent example for veterans everywhere. Grab the war profits to pay the veterans. That central idea should be the strategic aim in every fight for the veterans.
 



A serious indictment of the War Department’s demobilization slowdown was contained in, a report of a special Senate sub-committee appointed specifically to investigate the soldiers’ charges against the brass hats.
Even accepting the War Department’s claim that it needs 1,500,000 men in July – and, from our point of view, we do not – the Senate committee declared bluntly that this simply proves there is no need for hoarding 2,000,000 other men in the Army now by means of the demobilization slowdown.
 
Why They Want a Big Army
The Senate committee insists that the Army let these men out immediately. The committee stated bluntly there was no justifiable reason for the demobilization slowdown.
The question then arises, if 2,000,000 officers and men are “surplus,” even according to the testimony of the brass hats, why are they being kept in the Army?
Here we come to the crux of the whole demobilization issue.
The War Department wants a big Army to carry out the foreign policies of the Truman Administration. These policies are imperialist. They are rule by force, domination of a victorious imperialist power over millions of people. The army of 1,500,000 the War Department wants on July 1 is the instrument for carrying out these foreign policies. Since we are against imperialism, we are against the use of American troops abroad. We demand that all of them be returned and released!
The demobilization slowdown enters into this because it is a pressure move of the brass hats against the American people, both in order to maintain an army of at least 1,500,000 in July, and also as part of a clever campaign to force peacetime conscription on the American people.
 
Against Peacetime Conscription!
When Secretary of War Patterson this week declared that the army would keep its promise of releasing all but 1,500,000 men by July he was trying to accomplish two things: He said this promise would be kept if 400,000 replacements were found! This obviously is intended to create another “manpower crisis” in May when selective service expires. The second purpose of Patterson and the brass hats is to have the American people so preoccupied by the “manpower crisis” that no one will ask the question, why 1,500,000 men?
The “manpower crisis” is intended to be another big barrage for compulsory military training. Just as the brass hats sought to utilize the GI demonstrations for presenting the same argument: “You want the boys back? Give us replacements.” And meanwhile they present suggestions for compulsory military training.
Each move of the brass hats exposes another aspect of their long-range campaign for compulsory military training. The reason for this maneuvering is clear. The American people in overwhelming strength and numbers are against conscription! They may be confused and groping when it comes to understanding the implications of the Truman foreign policies, but one thing is certain. They don’t want large armies, and militarism, and a Third World War!
Certainly there is very little evidence to demonstrate that any of the brass hat maneuvers have gained ground for them. The blast by the Senate sub-committee is the latest illustration of the unpopularity of the brass hat views!
The fact that in May a major test of atomic power is going to take place likewise presents further difficulties for the brass hats in their efforts to bring militarism to American life. For the technological advances in warfare raise the whole question of armies, and navies, and other institutions. And they will evoke a further anti-war feeling in view of the deadly effects such a demonstration will reveal.
These developments signify that the difficulties for the introduction of peacetime, conscription and the growth of militarism in America are bound to increase rather than diminish in the next period.
The fight against conscription can bring fruitful results provided the pressure for bringing the GI’s back home now intensifies and the labor movement also increases its expressed opposition to conscription. This struggle is an important part of the work of the Workers Party!
 



The mistreatment of American GIs at the notorious Litchfield, England, reinforcement depot, “concentration camp,” finally has reached public print, as a result of the courts-martial of seven guards, and two junior officers.
The story of army brutality there was a familiar one. Prisoners were beaten, a regime of terror and drastic punishment for the most trivial “offenses” prevailed, and Litchfield became known as a real hell-hole. When one soldier died under “mysterious” circumstances, the scandal became too great to silence. So minor functionaries at the depot are now on trial. Colonel James A. Killian, commanding officer, and directly responsible for the guardhouse policy, has not been placed on trial.
Of course, the indignation over the brutality is real and justified. Life at Litchfield was very much like life at Dachau. At least GIs who were there so thought. Of course, the guards and officers deserve severest punishment for terrible treatment of the GIs. And the failure to courts-martial Colonel Killian speaks volumes about the army system of injustice.
 
Combat – or Litchfield!
The liberal press has a good moral right to be violently indignant over this scandal. We are too. But moral indignation explains nothing, and gets nowhere.
Litchfield was a hell-hole because it was supposed to be one. Not because Colonel Killian was a louse personally. Not because some of the guards were pyscho cases, and sadists. But because it was army policy.
The real story of Litchfield, and many other similar depots was explained in the testimony of Major LoBuono, former provost Marshal at that camp. “We’ve got to make life so tough for these prisoners they’ll be glad to get back into combat.” That is the real reason why Litchfield was a hell-hole.
Each army has a harsh discipline, for only discipline that is greater than the fear of death can make men risk their lives in imperialist combat. When men are moved by great social ideals, when they are willing to die for a cause, the problem of discipline is relatively easy. Discipline in that kind of an army concerns itself with team-work, combat efficiency, and operation control.
Even in Trotsky’s Red Army, fighting for the greatest idea of mankind, the world socialist revolution, there were deserters and cowards who were dealt with sharply. The violence of war creates a harsh discipline. But such actions in the Red Army of old (today’s “Red Army.” is like any imperialist army) were exceptional. For the Red Army in those days had an orientation. They had discipline, and morale based on political understanding.
The Litchfield hellhole was a classic example of the substitute for morale. “We’ve got to make life so tough for these prisoners that they’ll be glad to get back into combat.” A greater fear than the fear of death was required. It was the fear of life in a Litchfield hell-hole. Most soldiers get the point quickly. They are too smart to get themselves caught in a Litchfield depot. And the more notorious the reputation of a depot, the greater the efforts of the GIs to stay away from it.
It is not accidental that the chief complaints about treatment at Litchfield came in the winter of 1944–45 when the break-through at Ardennes startled the American army, and GIs saw how quickly their lives might be snuffed away by Brass Hat blunders. Nor could there be a stirring call to arms to block Von Runstedt. For who believed in the war? The Brass Hats got reinforcements the only way they knew how. For “slackers,” there was always the nightmare of Litchfield.
 
An Image of Capitalism
Thus the whole Litchfield scandal testifies, above all, to the character of the war and its instrument for victory, the capitalist army. It was a war in which the GIs had very little faith. At best it was considered a dirty, if necessary, job. Not the Wall Street profiteers, nor their Roosevelt government, nor the army itself could sell enthusiasm to the GIs.
This is illustrated in the entire combat training program followed by the army. Battle-hardening was understood by most soldiers, for they saw no way out of fighting, and obviously a well-trained outfit stood a better chance than ill-trained troops. Technical proficiency was readily acquired. However, the other side of the question, the “know-why,” was something else. Here, political orientation was imperative. And the result: the biggest joke in the army was the orientation program. The politest word ever used to describe it was “baloney.”
In one sense the Brass Hats were correct in complaining that the orientation snafu wasn’t their responsibility. They weren’t making foreign policy. They were concerned primarily in carrying it out. This was the responsibility of the Roosevelt administration, the government devoted to carrying out American imperialist ambitions. The Brass Hats are responsible, however, as the direct controlling power of the army. They, therefore, substituted force for reason in handling the “know-how” question that bothered the soldiers. This army policy reached its crudest expression in the Litchfield scandal. The German reflecting the most brutalized development of the capitalist state, no doubt could boast of worse.
Everywhere, however, an integral part of a combat training program was to make life generally so miserable that any change became welcome. In the infantry this kind of hardening of the men was considered standard operating procedure. The other, more publicized method, of building pride in outfits, as a morale factor, received its death blow when the Marshall individual replacement system went into effect early in 1944, for famous divisions and combat teams became just numbers through which a steady flow of “fresh dog meat” passed.
In conclusion, the Litchfield scandals must be seen as an inevitable part of any army based on its class rule of a privileged few, fighting a war of conquest, in which the basic interests of the vast majority of enlisted men are not served. Every capitalist army is and must be based on rule by force and not reason. This is its role in society.
 



DETROIT, FEB 12 (BY WIRE) – A CITY-WIDE STRIKE COMMITTEE REPRESENTING ALL GENERAL MOTORS LOCALS IN AREA TODAY ACCUSED THE UNITED ELECTRICAL, RADIO AND MACHINE WORKERS UNION-CIO OF A DOUBLE-CROSS IN ACCEPTING 18½ CENTS AN HOUR WAGE INCREASE FROM GM.
THIS ACTION CAME AT THE SAME TIME GM OFFERED TO SETTLE THE 85-DAY STRIKE OF 175,000 WORKERS BY GRANTING AN 18½ CENTS AN HOUR WAGE INCREASE, PROVIDED THE UAW-CIO GAVE UP MAINTENANCE OF MEMBERSHIP CLAUSE IN OLD CONTRACT. GM LIKEWISE DEMANDED EXCLUSION FROM OLD CONTRACT OF ANY IMPROVEMENTS ONCE GRANTED BY WAR LABOR BOARD IN PREVIOUS DIRECTIVES. THIS OFFER REJECTED IMMEDIATELY BY UAW-CIO, AFTER STALINIST-DOMINATED UERMWA BROKE SOLID FRONT AGAINST GM AND SIGNED A SEPARATE AGREEMENT COVERING SOME 25,000 UE WORKERS AT GM.
THE UE-CIO MOVE STUNNED ENTIRE LABOR MOVEMENT, WAS ATTACKED QUICKLY BY R.J. THOMAS, PRESIDENT OF UAW-CIO. HOWEVER, THE REAL BLAST AGAINST THIS MOVE CAME BY THE DELEGATES REPRESENTING ALL GM LOCALS HERE.
GM TOOK QUICK ADVANTAGE OF THE LATEST BLUNDER IN TOP CIO CIRCLES TO PRESS FOR ITS OFFER WHICH IS LOWER IN TWO RESPECTS THAN THAT RECOMMENDED BY TRUMAN’S FACT-FINDING BOARD. LATTER HAD SUGGESTED A 19½ CENTS AN HOUR WAGE INCREASE AND REINSTATEMENT OF THE OLD CONTRACT WHICH GM HAS REPUDIATED.
GM OFFERED ONE SOP IN ITS LATEST MANEUVER TO WEAKEN THE UAW. IT SAID IT WOULD ACCEPT THE CHECKOFF IF THE UAW ELIMINATED MAINTENANCE OF MEMBERSHIP.
ONE-HALF HOUR AFTER THIS OUTRAGEOUS PROPOSAL WAS MADE, THE UAW-CIO COMMITTEE, HEADED BY WALTER REUTHER, STORMED OUT OF THE MEETING AND ANNOUNCED THAT NEGOTIATIONS WERE AGAIN BROKEN OFF.
 



DETROIT, Mich. – The 18 and a half cent wage increase recently won by the UAW-CIO in its major contracts in the auto industry is rapidly disappearing in an infamous scissors squeeze.
The story of the wage increases disappearing before the rising cost of living has been told repeatedly, and is known to most people. That can be called one blade of the scissors.
But the other side of the story hasn’t received enough attention, although it is now the burning issue in the shops.
This is the wiping out of wage increases by the introduction of speed up. In some cases, wages have actually been CUT by the use of the speed-up. This may be called the other blade of the scissors squeezing labor.
In many shops this is accomplished simply by speeding up the rate per hour of the assembly line. In one plant, for example, the number of cars assembled in one hour increased from 40 to 45 to 50. Since this was done without increasing manpower, the result was that each man was doing roughly 12% more work each hour!
 
Set Pre-Union Standards
At Ford Motor company, the rate of production is set by 1939 standards, according to an agreement between the union and the company. This means that pre-union standards now prevail, for the 1939 standards were exactly that.
At Chrysler, the 1941 standards of production are set as “normal.”
In a word, the production standards of five and six years ago are being used by the corporations io judge the amount of work each man should do per hour. Many of the hard-won gains of the shop committees arid the stewards are wiped out automatically by this device. Is it a wonder that dissatisfaction intensifies in the shops?
The change from war-time production standards to the old peace-time speed-up technique produces sharp reaction in every shop. The recent Briggs strike arose from a dispute over production standards. The workers just refuse to go back five years to the old standards. In other shops, the “right” of management to speed up the line, and thus the work of every man on it, is protested by slowdowns, a very high rate of quitting, and absenteeism.
It is becoming increasingly evident that the next major profit-making move of the corporations is going to be not along the lines of price increases, but rather by extraction of more work per hour from each man through the speed-up. Thus the struggle within the shops is becoming more acute and unrest greater. Unless the UAW-CIO meets the next crisis with an additional point in its program, higher wages without the speed-up, in addition to the program of higher wages without higher prices, the gains of the auto workers will be built on a quicksand foundation.
In the fight against speed-up, the shop steward system is the key to the answer. A powerful system, backed by a solid rank and file, can intervene, and must intervene, in the production process. Management can not be permitted to control production, independently of the will of the men on the line. It is the assembly line worker whose tired body feels the effect of the speed-up. In self-defense, the assembly line workers must and are beginning to take a hand in production control.
The speed of the line must be subject to renegotiation. The old pre-war rate is just too fast. And stewards must get out those stop clocks again, because the companies cheat on the speed every chance they get, and everyone knows it.
 



DETROIT, Oct. 27 – The contrast between the beginning of the great GM strike struggle and the present attempt to obtain a wage increase at Chrysler, and other auto plants, reflects the significant changes that have taken place in the UAW-CIO in the past year.
The obvious conservative approach of the UAW-CIO leadership, the result of the new and important bloc between Philip Murray, CIO president, and Walter P. Reuther, UAW president, along with economic uncertainties in the auto industry have combined to produce an attitude of cautious and watchful waiting on the part of the men in the shops.
 
“Watchful Waiting”
The crusading spirit of the GM workers is not evident. At Chrysler, a year of sporadic employment with a short work week that meant an average of $29 weekly pay for the workers, plus the big layoffs, have brought about a cautious sentiment among the workers.
The fact that the entire union leadership is moving slowly and conservatively is realized by the workers, and this accounts for the feeling of “watchful waiting.” The UAW board didn’t even discuss important questions of strike strategy, as demanded by the secondary leadership.
The fact that Reuther is “keeping his hands off” the Chrysler negotiations, allowing Norman Mathews, director of the Chrysler division of the UAW-CIO, to handle them, signifies to many workers that “Chrysler isn’t it.” “It” meaning a big fight.
Right now Reuther is basking in the bloc formed with Murray, for his election as a CIO vice-president in the place of R.J. Thomas is considered a cinch. Murray is for it.
In addition, at the UAW board meeting Murray tore into the Communist Party and bluntly told George Addes he would have to make up his mind quickly to support either Murray or the Communist Party. Small wonder that Reuther isn’t anxious, from his bureaucratic point of view, to upset the apple-cart by another strike struggle along the crusading lines of the GM battle.
Meanwhile, the Stalinists are beginning to retreat and duck for some cover, now that Murray has finally made up his mind to come to grips with them. John Williamson, trade -union director of the Stalinists, sounded the retreat in a recent article in the Daily Worker when he declared the “main task of progressives is to unite behind the leadership of Philip Murray.”
In a word, both major factions dominating the UAW-CIO for their own reasons are approaching the Chrysler wage negotiations with extreme caution and care.
 
Situation Will Change
But this situation cannot continue long. Nor can the GM Program be suppressed. Only today, Philip Murray in a speech before a steel workers’ conference adopted the central idea of Reuther’s GM Program: “Higher wages without a price increase.” It is bound to be a major issue in the coming steel negotiations.
More local unions in the UAW-CIO are taking advantage of the IEB statement to begin wage negotiations. This movement can easily spread beyond the control of the top leadership. Likewise, the national CIO convention will climax the present factional struggle within the CIO and clear the way for some action.
At the special UAW IEB meeting, the board ignored all demands of the secondary leadership for adopting a national strike strategy. However, if Chrysler says no to any wage increases, the whole problem will be posed in sharpest form.
Each major strike wave in American history has its own peculiarities. The next major series of clashes between the workers and the giant corporations will assume new and different forms than the post-war strike struggles, although the basic class content will be unchanged.
The contrast between the GM strike and the Chrysler workers’ struggles is the first evidence of this fact. The almost universal adoption by the CIO of Reuther’s GM Program – higher wages without price increases – is a second evidence.
 



DETROIT, Nov. 2 – In spite of three major developments in the auto industry during the past week, the fact is that the UAW-CIO is marking time in the struggle on the wage front until after the steel workers’ wage policy conference on December 15.

The crisis at Ford, where the company, taking advantage of the notorious “company security” provisions of the contract signed by the UAW-CIO, fired 18 shop leaders for participation in the foundry strike – this crisis is subsiding under the powerful pressure of the UAW-CIO top leadership backed by Philip Murray, CIO president.
 
Wage negotiations at Chrysler are being stalled until after the steel workers conference, when a definite policy will be worked out, Norman Mathews, Chrysler UAW-CIO director; admitted during a speech at Dodge Local last week.
 
Many local unions’ in the Detroit area have signified their intension of reopening wage negotiations and in some cases, like Packard, negotiations already have begun.
 

Reason for Slow Tempo
The reason for the slow tempo of developments in the fight against the auto barons is that Philip Murray, CIO president, insisted at the recent UAW-CIO executive board meeting that the UAW-CIO pull in its horns and follow his leadership and the policies which he expects to have adopted at the steel, workers’ wage policy conference, if not at the CIO national convention.
Take the Ford situation: the local union executive board unanimously voted for the policy of calling for a. strike vote on the basis of demanding that Ford eliminate health hazards at the foundry plant, where a ten-day shutdown in protest over conditions took place recently. But effort to soft-pedal this move has been made, and the union demand that the hazards be eliminated and the union men fired be reinstated immediately, remains unsettled.
Some compromise formula is expected to be adopted this week. Incidentally, the whole leadership of the Ford Local 600, as well as the top leadership of the UAW-CIO, maintain nothing but embarrassed silence over the fact that signing of the “company security” provisions gave Ford a technicality to try to punish the union militants in the foundry strike.
At a meeting of presidents of the Chrysler locals, the policy outlined by Norman Mathews was adopted unanimously, even though many local union leaders are not really in agreement with the idea of stalling along until Murray and the steel workers do something. But Murray’s curt dismissal of any talk of a real auto strike against all major companies to force a wage increase has quieted down the UAW leadership. The evasion of the UAW leaders on specifying a concrete figure for wage increases comes from Murray’s demand that steel set the amount, and not the UAW-CIO.
 
Leaders Under Pressure
In view of the close bloc between Walter Reuther, UAW-CIO president, and Murray, the anti-Reuther factions have been very cautious on uttering any statements criticizing the present policy in fear of a joint Reuther-Murray blast.
Of course, the present conservative policy being pursued has very definite limitations since a continuation of the trend toward reopening wage negotiations will in itself pose a major crisis which will be very difficult to evade. Certainly a coordinated steel union-auto union strategy is a sound idea, but not at the expense of retarding the kind of struggle which has made the UAW-CIO the spearhead of the labor movement. At every turn^of events in the present developing strike struggles, the ranks of the UAW-CIO have forced the leadership forward. It shall remain so in the next period, even though the top leadership of the CIO hopes otherwise.
The major move of John L. Lewis, president of the United Mine Workers of America, to obtain new concessions for the coal miners likewise adds pressure on the top CIO leadership to produce some results. The inevitable showdown cannot be postponed for too long.
 



DETROIT, April 28 – The first meeting of the international executive board of the UAW-CIO ended this week with a compromise on organizational posts between the Walter Reuther and George Addes-Stalinist forces in the auto workers union.
Reuther obtained the position of educational director for Victor Reuther, his brother and lieutenant. He also retained directorship of the General Motors division of the UAW-CIO.
Addes kept control of the research department with the reappointment of James Wishart, a key Stalinist, as director. R.J. Thomas, vice president, took charge of the competitive shops division.
 
Behind The Compromise
The significance of this compromise, however, is what is important to the auto worker militants, not the posts themselves. After the Addes-Stalinist machine in a bloc with Thomas and Richard T. Leonard, the other vice president of the union, presented and won by majority vote the adoption of the full program for the UAW-CIO two events occurred which forced the majority to restrain itself from a further head-on clash with Reuther.
The sharp attack by Mrs. Eleanor Roosevelt on the UAW-CIO majority on the executive board, was a serious blow to the long-range plans of the Stalinists for a Third Party.
Unless prominent figures like Mrs. Roosevelt, Henry Wallace and others take a part in the Stalinist plans for a third party it is doomed in advance. Any policy calculated to antagonize completely these people is a tactical blunder from the Stalinist point of view, and that was recognized immediately. The Stalinists neatly refrained from a direct answer to Mrs. Roosevelt, and instead R.J. Thomas, as usual, was allowed to make the reply, and take the rap.
Secondly, in this same connection, the fact that Reuther is also inclined towards a Third Party movement – his brother Victor was one of the sponsors of the recent Chicago conference held on this question under the direction of Socialist Party and liberal forces – posed another difficult problem for Addes and the Stalinists. Their only attack on the Reuther move was that it was premature. But the fact remains that if any Stalinist strategy for a Third Party is going to succeed, it must include the UAW- CIO, and that means Reuther also. In program, the new line of the Stalinists tends to coincide with that of Reuther in the UAW-CIO. This is the dilemma and problem of both Reuther and the Stalinists.
 
Stalinists Given Warning
The other major event that occurred while the UAW-CIO executive board was meeting, was the first open, direct and blunt attack on the Stalinists within the CIO by a major figure in the CIO. Emil Rieve, president of the Textile Workers, delivered a sharp attack against the Stalinists at the textile workers convention now being held. Coming on top of the crude exclusion of the Stalinists from the Southern organizing drive of the CIO, it is a storm warning signal to the Stalinists. The top CIO officialdom is opening up its fight against the Stalinists. Sidney Hillman’s speech last week against a Third Party was another sign.
Any further direct attack against Reuther by the majority of the executive board of the UAW-CIO would guarantee Reuther’s unity with the “right-wing” forces in the CIO who want to intensify the fight against the Stalinists.
Reuther took full advantage of this situation by issuing another blast against the Stalinists on the last day of the executive board meeting. He called attention to the provision in the UAW-CIO constitution barring “Communists” from office. He declared that there would be no appointees on the union international payroll who were “Communists” (Stalinists). Of course, he had just voted to retain Wishart in the research department.
The point is that Reuther – in view of the national struggle developing within the CIO between the top leadership and the Stalinists – is squeezing every possible advantage from that situation.
 
Ranks Must Intervene
The trouble with all these developments is that policy and program of the UAW-CIO are being developed in the machinations and maneuvers of the top leaders, and not by a powerful and healthy intervention of the rank and file. There still exists too much confusion over policy left unsettled by the recent convention for the ranks to intervene decisively, as they must sooner or later. And the sooner the better.
The action of the UAW-CIO executive board to authorize strikes at Ford and Chrysler was a maneuver, and nothing else. All Ford locals received wires from the executive board demanding that the contract, including company security, be ratified quickly. The demand for retroactive pay immediately at Ford is a tactic to assure ratification of the contract. The strike threat at Chrysler over discharge of men over 65 years of age likewise is a tactic in negotiations on this issue. Everyone expects Chrysler to shut down for a few weeks for parts shortages, and no one is anxious for a strike, because it means at least three weeks without the unemployment compensation that a lay-off would bring in. The local unions weren’t even sounded out by the executive board on strike sentiment.
 



Every trade union militant knows from his own experiences that the Communist (Stalinist) Party has made a turn in its union policies since the war ended and the imperialist antagonisms between Russia and the Anglo-American bloc became intensified.
In the war period it was easy to distinguish the Stalinists by their vicious anti-union policies – for the speed-up, against any strikes, against job action – and by their outdoing the American Legion in flag-waving.
These reactionary policies in the union movement were relatively easy to oppose, for they ran counter to every ABC interest of labor. These policies alienated all militant workers and cost the Stalinists much of their union support.
The extent of the defeat suffered by the Stalinists in the union movement has been revealed in the Stalinist press. Recently a report from the coal fields quoted a coal miner in explaining why Stalinist branch after Stalinist branch had disappeared. “The party deserted us in the war,” he said. The truth, of course, is that the Stalinists long ago deserted the working class in its struggle for emancipation, but it took the war to bring that home to many people.
The Stalinists recently published excerpts from a report by John Williamson of their political committee, in which he said: “Generally, our party is not yet rooted in the shops and industries that can be decisive in determining the main course of the workers’ struggle.”
In General Motors there are only 122 CP members, after a ten- year concentration! In Toledo, out of 252 party members, only 24 are auto workers.
In New York, the percentage of industrial workers in the CP dropped from 34 to 29 per cent In Michigan from 66 to 58 per cent, and in California from 41 to 38 per cent.
In a word, the Stalinist party changed its composition as a result of its role during the war. It lost much of its working class support.
 
New Stalinist Line in Unions
Today, the Stalinists are engaged in a well-financed and well- organized campaign to re-establish and increase their trade union influence. A recruiting drive for 20,000 members has been announced.
How does the Stalinist party expect to accomplish this goal? By its turn in trade union policies. The Stalinists have now put on the costume of union militants again. They are for strikes, they speak against “company security” and they talk about a new political party which they label a third party.
But before taking up their new program, it is necessary to call something else to the attention of trade union militants. The future role of the Stalinists cannot be judged solely by the policies they carried out during the current strike wave.
The post-war strike wave caught the Stalinists in the period of their policy change. Except for isolated cases like the packinghouse strike, where they mobilized themselves on the new program, the Stalinists had just begun to carry out their new line.
What is the actual form that these new policies will take? The Stalinists are again concentrating on trade union struggles, and for the building of a third party. In the field of foreign policy, they concentrate all activity around the slogans “Against Anglo-American imperialism” (but not Russian, to be sure), and they have raised the slogan, “A Struggle for Socialism.” All in all, mighty “radical” for the same outfit that out-Legioned the American Legion in the war.
These new policies coincide to a considerable extent with the moods of the discontented masses in America today. The Stalinists expect to capitalize on this fact. The deep dissatisfaction among the people with the two capitalist parties provides fertile soil for the third party slogan, especially as a neat flank attack on the idea of a Labor Party.
As for the anti-union policies pursued during the war; the expulsion of Earl Browder is supposed to serve as a convenient scapegoat. “We expelled the man who revised the basic party program.” This is the Stalinist alibi among workers.
The new turn of the Stalinists, therefore, presents a real problem for trade union militants and revolutionary socialists in the union movement. Stalinism isn’t dead in America; it is just beginning to make its major drive for mass influence!
 
Avoid the Trap of Red-Baiting
Points one, two, three and the next twenty, in a program of fighting Stalinism successfully, are that it cannot and must not be fought from a “red-baiting” point of view. This is a fatal policy. The history of the labor movement is strewn with bodies of unionists broken in that kind of struggle against the Stalinists. Last week the utility workers’ convention passed a resolution which barred any believer in “Communism, Nazism” or any ism from holding office. That kind of victory over Stalinism only obscures the real issue. For it is part and parcel of the same totalitarian
methods which mark the Stalinist tactics. It is precisely on this issue, “democracy within the unions,” that union militants can score their first dent in the Stalinists’ newly-painted armor tinged with red. The Stalinists as agents of a totalitarian power reflect the character of their rulers: the Stalin machine. In American trade unions they are forced to fight against freedom of speech and press, except, of course, for themselves. In unions which they control, they maintain a ruthless bureaucracy. Thus, even the new Stalinist policies find themselves going counter to the democratic yearnings of the masses. The program of a Philip Murray fails in fighting the Stalinists among other reasons because it also violates the democratic principles required to keep alive a progressive union movement.
On the matter of political action, advocates of a labor party – and its foremost proponents must remain the revolutionary socialists – must continue to counterpose that idea to the Stalinist propaganda of a Third Party.
In combating the Stalinists within the union movement, it is very important to bring out the record. Let it speak. The war record of the Stalinists in particular subjects them to merciless and well- deserved blows. Stalinism is a deadly danger within the labor movement, but the record is not enough.
Only by participation in the mass struggles, in the consistent advocacy of a genuine class struggle program, such as our transitional program provided us, and by continuing as fighters of real trade union democracy, can the revolutionary socialists guide trade union militants in their activity and successful struggle against the Stalinists, and build the base for a genuine mass revolutionary party rooted in the labor movement.
 



Another major eruption in the demobilization scandal hit the front pages last week.

Five thousand GI’s paraded in Manila in mass protest over delays in shipment home. The other similar demonstrations were also reported in the Philippines.
 
In America, 150,000 sweated out Christmas at Pacific Coast ports, transportation being snafued.
 
In China, Marines kicked openly about doing guard duty over British property.
 
In the Persian Gulf, protests over a “manpower pool,” which meant keeping a few thousand GI’s stuck in that hell-hole, reached America.
 
At Fort Wayne, Ind., 573 Navy vets held up a train for two hours until their cattle-car accommodations were improved.

These are the outstanding incidents that come to the surface. They express in a mild way what the 3,200,000 men still overseas are thinking.
Meanwhile General Wedemeyer in China brazenly announces that 4,000 more troops, plus the 50,000 Marines already stuck there, plus the air force men left there, are needed and are going to stay there a long time. And in Washington, the brass hats tell Congress that demobilization is too fast, the Army is “disintegrating” and they need more troops permanently.
Here we have two forces moving in opposite directions. The GI’s want to get the yoke of the Army off their collective necks and get home now, while the Brass Hats want to keep the Army large and abroad!
The reason is simple and clear. The Brass Hats are carrying out the imperialist policy of the Administration. They need pawns in the game of world power politics. And those pawns are the GIs.
They should tell it to the Marines. Especially to the combat veterans guarding Chinese railroads and British owned coal properties, run under concentration camp conditions and with a juicy profit.
 
Vets Pay for It
Why aren’t more ships used to bring men home? The shipping companies make more profit hauling other things.
Why do enlisted men and sailors travel so often on what we call “cattle-cars”? The railroad companies are too busy making money on civilians. Soldiers can be forced to travel on anything ... up to a point.
Since 1942 the railroads have been making big profits on GI transportation. Look at the terrible meals always served—paid for with good taxpayers’ dough.
The whole situation comes down to a clear-cut proposition.
The men in the Army are being used as pawns in the power politics of America and as a means of profit making at home.
Where are the veterans’ organizations in this situation? Has the American Legion blasted this mess? Of course not. And the Veterans of Foreign Wars?
Only in those places where the veterans of this war are predominant has anything been said for the GI’s and a fight made in their behalf.
 
Other Horse-Trading
All those vets should be in one organization, fighting for the men still stuck in the Army, and joined together against the set-up a vet meets in civilian life.
The organized labor movement is making a tragic mistake in not serving as the basis for a new vets’ movement. There are over 500,000 union men already to serve as a basis.
It isn’t too late. We need a veterans organization of the vets, by the vets and for the vets of this war. It should be based on the union movement, from which so many veterans came, and whose basic interests are ours. Outfits like the Amvets and Bolte’s committee should be amalgamated into it, as well as posts of the American Legion and the Veterans of Foreign Wars which are dominated by union men and new veterans.
Out of these already existing posts and outfits should come the Labor Legion, organized and backed by the CIO. Dispersion of strength and energy is a tragic waste. Individual protests and diffused campaigns don’t bring enough results. The men in the Army and those of us back >need one organization solidly united as part of the labor movement.
 



The first serious and organized political opposition to the present world policies of the Truman Administration from within the ranks of the Army came with dramatic and violent suddenness in the GI demonstrations in Manila and throughout the world.
In demanding their return home and their non-interference in Philippine politics, the 20,000 GI’s who held a series of protest meetings in the islands raised a series of political questions which are causing consternation in Washington.
The language the GI’s used was expressive of the new kind of thinking that is going on in the Army. They didn’t get up and just gripe. They spoke about the imperialist character of the United States foreign policies. Some talked about being used as pawns. Others warned against conscription. It was just the kind of I&E (information and education) program that the brass hats never wanted the soldiers to hold.
The cables and letters of thousands of other GI’s stationed everywhere confirmed the seriousness of this situation.
This crisis reached a peak when the War Department announced a drastic revision in the demobilization schedule which would force veterans to remain overseas for a long period. The brass hats calmly announced they were cutting the rate of discharge from 1,000,000 men a month to less than 300,000, thus assuring that at least 1,500,000 soldiers would still be stuck overseas next summer!
“Our overseas forces would be dangerously under strength in occupying hostile countries if all eligible men were to be returned," the brass hats said, in trying to explain their broken promises to the combat veterans.
In a radio broadcast, Drew Pearson, whose exposés of the brass hats have won him a wide hearing among GI’s, added the information that another reason the brass hats were slowing up demobilization is because they wanted to blackmail the American people into supporting peacetime conscription.
In the Philippines, this news combined with some local developments to create a fever heat of excitement and indignation among the veterans. One division was alerted for duty after President Truman spoke of the “danger of unrest” in the Philippines.
GI’s everywhere knew that the Army was beginning to lag in its own already announced program of returning soldiers home. The pouring of more men into China to intervene in China’s internal political situation was a disturbing sign. The use of American marines to guard British property in China was common knowledge.
The news of American government- controlled ships transporting Dutch marines to suppress the Indonesian fight for freedom was known. The usual Army snafu in handling demobilization aggravated the situation.
And, finally, Secretary of War Patterson aroused the ire of the Pacific veterans when he stated in an interview with the Pacifican that he didn’t know the details of demobilization. To be exact, he didn’t know that points were frozen as of September 2. This ignorance and contempt for the real problems and concerns of the GI’s added fuel to the flames of resentment.
When the series of demonstrations followed, Lieut.-Gen. Styer added his nickel’s worth by saying via radio to a jeering and booing audience of GI’s that the “changing international situation” caused the War Department to revise demobilization schedules.
 
How GI’s Feel
The unprecedented nature of the GI protests and their worldwide scope served to emphasize the bitterness and hatred the GI’s feel for the Army and the foreign policies which make pawns of them.
Of course, the demands of the Manila demonstrators don’t answer all the questions. When they ask for their own return, and not the return of the men stuck in Japan and Germany, they are short-sighted. Those men have an equal right to come back home. The policies against which the Manila soldiers protest are carried out everywhere. There are a few thousand GI’s stuck in the Persian Gulf, for example. And in India. And elsewhere. All the American troops should be withdrawn from overseas, for all of them are being used as a police force against the common people and their struggle for liberty. The Philippines are not an exception. They are the rule.
The insidious attempt of the War Department to foist conscription on the American people to build a large army and to continue the present imperialist policies must be fought as part of this struggle. There is no point in, freeing some men from the grip of the Army only to penalize others.
The duty of every person is to back the demands of the GI’s to get home and to continue the fight against the source of this demobilization scandal, U.S. imperialism.
 



The GI pressure campaign for immediate return home gathered spectacular worldwide strength during the past week and challenged, in effect if not in intention, the imperialist policies of the Truman Administration.
The fact that protesting Gl’s added a blistering criticism of the whole army structure and policies to their demands for coming home signified how deeply rooted the present army crisis is. The election of permanent soldiers’ committees to direct the campaign and the appeal of some of these committees to the CIO unions to take up their struggle emphasized the gravity of the situation.
 
Against Caste System
In Paris, 500 GI demonstrators took the unprecedented step of publicly demanding the abolition of all special privileges for officers and a drastic reform of the tyrannical courts- martial system. These demands, embodied in an Enlisted Men’s Magna Carta, struck at the very core of the army caste system, which is based on extra privileges and power for the officer clique.
The boiling point on the caste system came after the War Department announced that officers and the first three grades of non-commissioned officers would be given the privilege of bringing their wives, children and fiancées abroad at government expense. The revival of this old peacetime army rule at this particular time added fuel to the fires of discontent raging among the ranks. For it offered exactly nothing to that strata of the army that does all the hard and dirty work, namely, the lowest four grades.
Everywhere the whole army system, as testified by hundreds of letters in Stars and Stripes, Yank and letters to editors in hometown newspapers, has been operating with deadly effect on the morale of Gl’s. The latter had ideas alien to brass- hat thinking, such as democratic rights, promotions based off merit, etc.
This latest turn in events in the GI protest against occupation duties makes it impossible for Washington politicians and the War Department to dismiss the soldiers as “just a bunch of homesick boys.”
 
U.S. Foreign Policy
The soldiers’ demonstrations have raised the whole question of American foreign policy. And they have also focused attention on some of the inherent evils in the instrument of that policy, the brass-hat-dominated army.
The disintegration of the GI’s morale was too great to be revived simply by platitudes about “fulfilling international obligations,” whether uttered by Truman, Congress, the War Department, the New York Times or PM.
The GI’s have a simple reply to this propaganda: “What about the obligations to us?”
Therefore the cry of 20,000 GI’s in Manila, “We want to go home,” echoed in every theater of operations. In Frankfurt, Germany, 5,000 angry GI’s ignored provocative incidents like the one where guards with fixed bayonets fenced them away from headquarters. In Guam, 18,000 demonstrated. In India, 5,000; in Korea, several thousand; in China, several thousand. GI’s came from nearby camps to picket the Pentagon Building in Washington.
In Yokohama, a colonel tried to subdue the demonstrations by charging they were “near mutiny” and led by “Communists and Bolsheviks,” but this was so raw that General MacArthur shortly afterward issued a statement testifying to the combat and service record of these soldiers. In Washington, General Eisenhower quickly warned field commanders against punitive measures for the thousands of GI’s.
The crude attempt of one field commander to stifle all criticism appearing in the Daily Pacifican boomeranged when the entire staff protested publicly against “brass-hat pressure.” In India, a sergeant was busted and confined to a psychiatric ward for mimeographing some material for his buddies, but his release was obtained.
Neither General Eisenhower’s policy of “handling with kid gloves” nor his order to all field commanders to ship home immediately all surplus men failed to pacify the resentful GI’s. Permanent committees were set up among the soldiers – and this is significant – some of them wired CIO unions for help. Already the shipyard workers in their annual convention passed a resolution condemning those responsible for the demobilization slowdown. R.J. Thomas, president of the UAW, sent a copy of a wire he received to all senators and congressmen, expressing his sympathy with the soldiers.
This was a startling development for the brass hats. Organized labor is on record against their plan for peacetime conscription. Now it begins to take up the grievances of the GI’s.
Furthermore – and this accounts for the intensified bitterness of the GI’s – the War Department has not yet repudiated its repudiation of the solemn promises of General Marshall, when he was chief of staff, that all men with two years’ service would be eligible for discharge by March 21! In this factor an understanding of the aggravation of the GI’s is to be found.
Arthur Krock in the New York Times pointed out how the Truman stand would run counter both to widespread public sentiment and a section of Congress. In reality, the resistance to the GI’s demands is universal in Congress and in all Washington ruling circles.
The GI’s have raised certain fundamental questions which must be answered, one way or another.
 
Peacetime Conscription
The Paris GI’s blasted the structure of the army. They made a special point against the courts-martial system. Only recently the House Military Affairs Committee issued a report criticizing courts-martial. What is to be done?
There is another vital angle in this crisis. From Vienna, 362 soldiers cabled a congressman, who read the message to his colleagues, that the army demobilization slowdown was a bid for public support of peacetime conscription. How can such a charge be evaded when so much evidence points that way?
Only last week, when 600 GI’s landed as replacements in Germany, the first question they asked was: “When do we go home?” No one in Washington can satisfy the soldiers’ demands precisely because they believe in keeping them abroad. F.H. LaGuardia, speaking over the radio, urged soldiers to “stand by their posts.” Nice advice to give in comfortable New York, in civilian clothes, and with a $100,000-a-year radio contract!
The appeals of the brass hats, the New York Times and PM to soldiers to “keep American prestige abroad high,” fail to make the slightest dent in the consciousness of the soldiers because that isn’t the question for them at all.
The GI’s want to know why they can’t come home now, when they want to and when the folks back home want them to. They distrust the policies they sec carried out overseas. The Idea grows among them that “Those people want us to sacrifice for THEIR policies. They are playing us for suckers.” It is this new consciousness that worries Washington.
Congressional meetings this week, as well as public hearings with brass hats for speakers, are called for one main reason: how to combat this growing consciousness of the GI’s.
Labor Action and the Workers Party join with organized labor in supporting the GI demands to get back.
Bring all the GI’s home now!
 



The impending steel strike looms as the greatest labor struggle in the history of the American labor movement.
In size alone, it dwarfs even such a mighty struggle as the GM battle today. Over 700,000 steel workers are involved in the present crisis.
However, the vital role of the steel industry, more than just the number of workers concerned, is what gives such weight and magnitude to any nationwide steel strike.
For steel is the backbone of American industry. A serious shutdown in steel immediately forces a closing of the auto industry and a big portion of the coal industry, in particular the “captive” mines. Other industries will likewise be hit drastically.
From labor’s standpoint, the heart of the CIO is in this mass production industry. The United Steel Workers of America, CIO, is the backbone of the industrial union movement.
Steel is the citadel of American capitalism. It is run directly by the Morgans, Graces, Girdlers and other industrial barons.
Small wonder that every clash between steel workers and the industrial masters of America produced such violent repercussions in the country.
In the 1919 steel strike, all the might and power of the government as well as the armed guards and thugs of the steel industry were used to smash the heroic efforts of the steel workers to organize and bargain collectively.
Only in the period of militant strike struggles in 1936–37, when the CIO grew in giant strides by using revolutionary techniques like the sit-downs, did industrial unionism achieve a hold in the steel industry.
But even the success of the CIO did not prevent the steel barons from trying to smash the union movement there. In the disastrous “Little Steel” strike in 1937, the CIO took a serious beating. Only in 1941, during another strike wave which saw Ford toppled from its open shop throne, did Little Steel finally recognize union ism after a violent struggle at the Bethlehem steel plants.
In the face of the huge war profits of the steel, industry, the case of the steel workers is crystal clear and just. The demand for a $2 a day wage increase is a vital necessity to maintain a minimum living standard.
But justice and results seldom go hand in hand in the steel towns. They have been run too much like feudal estates rather than cities in which democratic rights prevail. The violent character of steel strikes flows partly from this fact. Violence has always been the answer of the steel barons to workers’ demands.
The coming struggle of the steel union can best be understood by a review of the “Little Steel” strike, for in the policies, program, and lessons gained there is a guide to the next battle. Here is a review of that strike we published in January 1938.
“The inherent weakness of the CIO (and of the AFL, of course), namely its pursuit of a class collaborationist policy whenever possible, revealed itself in the spring of 1937 at a great cost to the workers, in the so-called Little Steel strike.
“Refusal of the four independent steel companies, Inland, Republic, Crucible, and Bethlehem, to sign a contract with the Steel Workers Organizing Committee (CIO) in April 1937 made a strike inevitable. It appeared to the workers as a sure-fire success. The CIO top leadership, Lewis, Murray and others, were in direct charge. The Stalinists with their usual pomposity, also predicted inevitable success. They had bootlicked their way into secondary leadership, and they had considerable following because the rank and file considered them – ghastly illusion – as progressives.
“The steel companies didn’t waste any time. Terrorism, tons of false propaganda, injunctions, and all the other means of oppression were immediately employed against the strikers who shut down all the key plants. The steel workers had expected a fight. Years of brutality by the bosses had taught them that only a life and death struggle would bring victory. But the militant workers were cursed with the capitulatory leadership of the CIO and the Stalinist fakers. Instead of mass picket lines, a militant counter-offensive against the steel barons’ attacks, and a policy of class struggle, the workers were influenced to a program of faith in government agencies.
“It took the brutal shock of the Memorial Day massacre of 14 steel workers by Chicago police thugs to reveal the weakness in the CIO policies, and the danger of disastrous defeat unless the workers were given a program of action which had been tested and proven correct in the auto and other strikes. An aggressive campaign against the bloody murderers could have stirred into decisive action hundreds of thousands of workers in other industries. The rubber workers’ rank and file demanded a general strike, as advocated by revolutionary socialists. The auto plants were seething with the anger of union men. Mass action was on the order of the day.
“But the CIO leaders, seconded by the treacherous Stalinists, turned instead to Roosevelt. He rebuffed them, as was to be expected, with the classic comment, ‘A plague on both your houses.’ Governor Earle, of Pennsylvania, a political and personal associate of Murray, Lewis and other CIO leaders, double-crossed them and opened the large Cambria plant in Johnstown. Governor Murphy, the Roosevelt of Michigan, as Lewis called him, gave free reign to vigilantism in Monroe, Michigan, but threatened to call the National Guard if the workers defended themselves at a steel plant there. The CIO-backed governor of Ohio, Martin L. Davey, was called by Lewis to stop the terrorism in Youngstown and Canton. He did. He broke the strike by opening the plants with the bayonets of the Guard. Davey substituted ‘legal’ terrorism for the cruder form of vigilantism.
“How little prepared the strikers were for, these events was illustrated, most unfortunately, by the fact that the arrival of the national guard troops was cheered by them, with the Stalinists and the CIO leaders arranging meetings to welcome the khaki-clothed strike-breakers. When they saw the consequences of the leaders’ policies, the strikers returned to work, bitter, disillusioned, but not forgetting.”
 
Lessons for Today
Today, the lessons of the Little Steel strike remain in full force. Only the invincible might of the steel workers is worth depending on. Labor can and must stand on its own feet in this fight. The blundering policies of Phil Murray merit little confidence. The fact that he was forced to denounce the Truman administration makes it more difficult from him to return tomorrow with the same old song and dance which cost the steel workers so much in 1937.
The coming struggle between the steel workers and the monopoly capitalists ruling the steel industry can mark a great advance for the CIO and the entire labor movement if the lessons of 1937 have been learned and labor fights on a militant basis.
 



The political crisis that arose with the world-wide demonstrations of American soldiers continued this week, in spite of the alibis and explanations of the War Department on the demobilization slowdown.
Although the blunt threat of courts- martial to demonstrating soldiers had their effect – demonstrations ceased – the GIs advertised in large American newspapers, protesting the War Department’s orders canceling the promises that former chief of staff General Marshall had made last September.
With the automatic end of selective service in May threatening to cut the army’s supply of enlisted men, the army manifestly unpopular with the soldiers now in uniform, the Brass Hats are up against the problem of a large army for the purpose of American imperialism.
General Eisenhower argued that the demobilization slowdown was not a blackmail threat for compulsory military training. But few people took that seriously, because every thinking person knows that the War Department means to have a big army and that they’ll never get it by voluntary enlistment.
In addition, General Marshall’s promise that all men with two years’ service would be eligible for release by March 20 could not be satisfactorily explained away by General Eisenhower in his speech.
Thus, the New York Times pointed out what is perfectly obvious.
“... it is generally felt that the War Department had emerged from the situation – if it is not premature to use the word emerged – in not too good a light.”
 
Alibis Fail to Work
The popular dissatisfaction with the army’s demobilization slowdown is a kink in the administration’s imperialist policies. At the same time, it has exposed the real attitude of congressmen, “the friends of the GIs,’’ on this entire problem. Describing congressional reaction to General Eisenhower’s speech defending the slowdown, the N.Y. Times wrote: “Most congressmen were prepared to accept General Eisenhower’s explanation if the soldiers and the public turned the heat off.” They fervently hope that Eisenhower’s alibis would be accepted by the people.
The popular demand, “Bring the boys home now,” continues unabated. Letters to-editors, protests to congressmen, demonstrations by veterans in the states, have not ended. This is the answer to Congress’ hope.
The blunt fact is that the Brass Hats have alibied, and changed their public views and the demobilization schedules at every single turn of world events. Men with 85 points and over were not demobilized as promised after V-E day. It took mass pressure to get them out. After V-J day, the army was forced by soldier and public opinion to expand separation centers – a bottle-neck created by the Brass Hats who knew their public plan for demobilization could not be carried out with the handful of separation centers existing.
 
Opportunities for Labor
The attempt to put the stamp of militarism on American life has received a serious rebuff by the soldiers’ violent denunciation of the demobilization slowdown.
Other indications of the growing opposition to the Brass Hats was the blow dealt to the Army’s record in Italy in the demand of the veterans of the Rapido river crossing to obtain a full investigation of the terrible losses that occurred there. Such a demand by the widely-heralded 34th Infantry division is a damaging one to the prestige the Brass Hats carefully tried to built up in the war, partly by their suppression of the full facts of the battles.
The War Department’s public admission this week that the GI demonstrations were of a mass character, and not the work of a “handful of reds,” answered the Hearst press, and proved again what most of the American people believe: the GIs as a whole are bitter against the army and its policies.
These developments give further opportunity for the labor movement, especially the CIO which has taken up the cause of the GIs, to press its fight against conscription, against the Brass Hats’ plans, and in general the interest of uniting the ex-soldier, the veteran, with the labor movement.
 



DETROIT, Mar. 17 – Ending of the nation-wide General Motors strike last week removed the last restraining force to the pent-up differences in the UAW-CIO leadership over policies. A bitter dispute involving GM strike strategy and control of the UAW flared wide open, with the national convention beginning March 23.
Spearheading the reckless campaign to divide and confuse the auto workers and to discredit at any cost Walter Reuther, UAW director of the GM division, the Stalinist clique has begun a major drive to gain controlling influence in the UAW.
The Stalinists are being aided by the bloc into which they have maneuvered R.J. Thomas, union president, and Philip Murray, CIO president, who are supporting the wild and dangerous charges which the Stalinists are pumping into the ranks of the UAW.
The source of this alliance between the Murray-Thomas wing of the top CIO leadership and the Stalinists is their joint responsibility for the dissatisfaction of the GM strikers over the isolation and prolongation of the strike, the failure to settle any major plant grievances and the retreat from the excellent original strike demands of the GM workers.
The sensitivity of Murray to his role in the whole strike wave revealed itself in his speech before the CIO executive board meeting yesterday in Washington. Murray heatedly denied a report that he had interceded with the Truman fact-finding board to urge them not to recommend more for the GM strikers than he had obtained for the steel workers, namely 18½ cents an hour wage increase. Charles Wilson, GM official, had said as much in negotiations with the UAW leaders.
Fishing in troubled waters, the Stalinists have attributed the spreading of this story to the Reuther faction and have done everything possible to intensify the factional heat among the leaders of the CIO.
As a matter of fact, both Murray and the Stalinists know that the dissatisfaction and widespread criticism of Murray’s role in the GM strike does not stem from any such company-inspired story. It was not taken very seriously by anyone. The chief criticism of Murray is the undeniable fact that his terms for settlement of the steel strike were a direct blow at the whole demands and fight of the GM strikers. His formula: “Higher wages, higher prices for the corporations,” was the direct opposite of the GM strikers’ demand for higher wages without an increase in prices.
Murray likewise knows, just as R.J. Thomas knows, for he was in on the GM negotiations, that GM officials challenged the UAW negotiators to bring Murray to the conference table, because “Murray will settle for 18½ cents, just like he did in steel.” Murray is reasonable, Reuther is unreasonable, the GM officials chanted.
Nor can Murray explain away his silence on the GM strike in its last few weeks, his failure to come out strongly in support of their just demands. This policy lent support to the talk among auto workers that Murray was afraid for his prestige if Reuther got a better contract with GM than Murray got in the steel strike.
There is another big question that remains unanswered yet about the GM strike. What was Murray’s role in the secret deal made by the Stalinist leaders of the United Electrical Workers Union covering 25,000 GM workers organized in the UE? This secret pact shocked the whole labor movement, coming as it did in the middle of the GM strike and carried out brazenly by the Stalinists. Even R.J. Thomas denounced it in blistering language.
The Daily Worker, in defense of this deal, stated on Friday, March 15, that “UE leaders worked closely with Murray in line with general CIO strategy.” It is also known that Lee Pressman, Murray’s general counsel, was here the week that the UE signed the pact with GM officials, though UAW leaders did not know of his presence. Was Murray a partner in this secret deal, as the Daily Worker says? Auto workers want to know the answer.
The Murray-Thomas-Stalinist bloc is trying to evade these major issues or any real discussion of GM strike strategy, by asserting that Reuther was responsible for the prolongation of the strike. Thomas now claims the GM strike was called six weeks too early and that it was prolonged because Reuther was “unreasonable.”
 
Thomas and Reuther
This ignores the fundamental fact that the major, Reuther policy, higher wages without higher car prices, rested four-square on the overwhelming desires and needs of the auto workers in general and the GM strikers in particular. In his own blundering and weak fashion, Reuther, tried to stick by the policy which everyone knew the vast majority of GM strikers wanted. He refused to settle the strike on the terms and policies which Murray and Thomas favored, for it would have meant a real defeat in the strike!
Of course, everyone knows that Thomas, worried about his job as president of the UAW, is just hitting blindly at Reuther, picking up his arguments from the Stalinists because he has no program for the auto union. He denounces “smart strategy” and “people with a message” and “strategists” as though this were the issue. He ignores the well-known fact that at every turn of events in the GM strike he signed joint declarations of united policy with Reuther, and that, as president of the UAW, and the man mainly responsible for policy, he was a total bankrupt.
Thomas and the Stalinists ignore the fact that at every important crisis in the strike, the national GM delegate conference approved the strike policies pursued, and that the only real criticism of Reuther was his constant retreating from the original 30 per cent wage increase demand, and the settlement of all issues.
In the vote on the terms of the settlement of the GM strike 18 delegates voted against accepting the settlement because it wasn’t sufficiently good. The chief weakness of the settlement was the failure to eliminate the major grievances still existing. Thomas and the Stalinists wanted Reuther not merely to retreat but to capitulate before GM.
The first wave of enthusiasm and cheers that greeted the settlement dampened somewhat when the GM strikers learned that the grievances were not adjusted. In fact, there is every possibility that some locals might not go back to work, according to Thomas, because there are so many issues left unsettled.
Only two weeks ago the UAW top leadership admitted that the local plant grievances were a major point of difference between the corporation and the union. These grievances included elimination of outmoded speed-up piecework systems in 15 plants, the elimination of the so-called “merit spread” in 35 plants, safety and health problems, in 41 plants. Since the strike is settled, the local unions must now try to get these grievances adjusted on a local scale, and obviously they can hardly call strikes after the workers have already been out 113 days.
The fact that the national strike settlement did not include “company security” proposals, gives the GM Workers a weapon which other UAW locals do not have, for at Chrysler and Ford the whole shop steward system is jeopardized by the signing of company security proposals which are a direct threat to militant action by workers under the direction of shop committees.
There is every indication that most workers in the auto plants are more directly concerned with their plant problems than the factional dispute raging in the top leadership of the union. The burning, issue of seniority in the plants is creating heated dissension and violent argument, because rehiring is not being done on a straight seniority basis, and the corporations are inciting the differences among the workers.
Unless these major union problems, as well as the whole strategy of the UAW in GM and at Ford and Chrysler are discussed and settled, the UAW convention may degenerate into the kind of dirty, unprincipled politics which is the hall mark of the Stalinists, and which furnishes the most fertile field for their insidious policies.
 



DETROIT, Feb. 25 – Prolongation of the General Motors strike into its 96th day has posed questions which will appear as major issues at the forthcoming convention of the UAW-CIO.
Contrary to the hopes of R.J. Thomas, UAW-CIO president, and George Addes, secretary-treasurer, their intervention in the negotiations with GM officials failed to bring a satisfactory settlement of the strike last week.
Instead, these two UAW-CIO officials joined with the entire executive board of the union in unanimously condemning the arrogant corporation. The telegram blasting GM was sent at the insistence of Walter Reuther, UAW GM director, who presented it for adoption by the executive board at a special session this weekend. It went to all locals.
The endorsement in the telegram of the views of Reuther who insists on a 19½ cent wage increase, and no company security provisions, was a victory for his faction in Reuther’s drive to replace Thomas as president of the UAW.
The action of the UAW-CIO executive board in standing by Reuther’s demand that the corporation accept a 19½ cents increase, the inclusion of the good provisions of the old contract plus awards of the War Labor Board, was also a blow at James Dewey, federal conciliator. Dewey’s role has been greatly magnified by the press. In reality, his efforts have been mainly directed towards pressuring the union through releasing false statements of negotiation progress, the idea being that this would force the UAW to retreat some more. But Dewey’s efforts have failed.
Now Dewey has threatened to go to Philip Murray, CIO president, for support. In the steel negotiations Murray had accepted 18½ cents an hour, plus a price increase for steel.
GM officials, of course, are willing to meet with Murray to talk that kind of terms.
Reuther’s insistence on wage increases without price increases has become more than an issue in the GM negotiations. It is a major plank in his program for the coming UAW convention. Only yesterday a slate at Chrysler Local – R.J. Thomas’ own Local – was elected as delegates to the UAW convention on this program, and a Reuther-for-president slogan.
This action was the closest to an outright declaration by Reuther that he is aiming at Thomas’ job. The Reuther faction also insists that he has always been against the company security provisions. The Reuther faction intends to present to the UAW convention a better contract for GM than other UAW officials obtained at Ford or Chrysler. Also, to slug the Stalinists for the UE-GM settlement of last week. And to appear as outstanding opponents of company security provisions.
The inevitable jockeying for strategic, posts and positions at the convention goes on full force, with many an ambitious eye on the vice-presidency vacated by Richard Frankensteen’s resignation. It is entirely too early to predict what the results of the convention will be. It is very possible, for example, that Phil Murray will put enough pressure on to keep Thomas as president even if Reuther has enough votes. An Addes-Stalinist-Thomas bloc might coalesce and defeat Reuther. The election of delegates is just taking place and no one knows exactly what strength the various factions have.
Unlike last year, there will not be a powerful rank and file caucus united on a basic issue as the abolition of the no-strike pledge. This issue, of course, has disappeared and the entire UAW is in a process of realignment of forces, programs and groups. The lessons of the GM strike are just beginning to be understood. They point, however, to a program for militants in the UAW. Briefly, this might be described as the GM Program – linking wages with prices and profits, demanding that the corporation Open the Books, opposing company security, and adding to it the obvious necessity of a Labor Party. The GM workers performed an invaluable service to the labor movement in the demands they made of the corporation. Reuther, as head of the GM local, initiated the strike on the proper basis, but the fact remains that he permitted real issues in the strike to be pushed into the background. He did not stand up against the Phil Murrays who allowed labor’s wage gains to be stolen in Washington-granted increases. Precisely because he demonstrated a better understanding of the situation than other labor leaders is it necessary to subject his role to severe criticism. (In coming issues of Labor Action we shall, along with other articles discussing the issues before the UAW convention, specially evaluate the role played by Reuther in the GM strike. – Ed.)
An indication of the future was forecast last week in the public announcement by Larry Yost, chairman of the famous rank and file caucus, that a large bloc has been reformed at the Ford local to fight against “company security” and for a Labor Party. However, Yost is not a delegate to the convention, nor are many other rank and file leaders, so the fight among main factions in the UAW will probably occupy the center of the stage.
 



DETROIT – In spite of an apparent agreement on a wage-price policy by the majority of the International Executive Board of the! UAW-CIO, the factional struggle in the top leadership has not abated, but is rather becoming more intensified.
Major developments within the labor movement here testify to this conclusion. Recently we reported on the shifts among the top leaders in the UAW-CIO on wage-price policy. Walter P. Reuther, UAW president, finally has won overwhelming support for his basic idea of fighting for wage increases without price increases. Simultaneously both Richard T. Leonard and R.J. Thomas, vice-presidents, have deserted their Stalinist supporters on the demand that wage negotiations be reopened at all major corporations.
Nevertheless, the anti-Reuther bloc functions together in an effort to wrest organizational control of the UAW away from Reuther. In this connection, George Addes, secretary-treasurer, bears the biggest responsibility for the unprincipled factionalism prevalent in the top leadership. His refusal to break completely with the Stalinists pours kerosene on the factional fires within the union.
 
Financial Problem
At the recent UAW Executive Board meeting the acute problem of financial retrenchment, or more exactly, the elimination of “pork choppers" from the payroll was supposed to be settled. A special committee, including Reuther and Addes, came to virtual agreement and was supposed to make one report to the board. However, Addes suddenly came in with a separate report and made proposals which were aimed mainly at weakening the international union administration under Reuther’s control.
An illustration of the reckless character of Addes’ proposal was the virtual elimination of the vital veterans department. The board by a small margin voted to reduce the vets department’ by one person. This, in spite of a convention mandate to the International Executive Board to set up a functioning department. The reason for the elimination of the vets department is, of course, the fact that Emil Mazey, the well known militant, is director of it, and the department was making a splendid record of achievement.
Another example: At the March convention of the UAW, a special board to investigate R.J. Thomas’ charges of “intimidation of delegates, racketeering, etc.,” was set up. It refused to make a written report to the board, it admitted that the only intimidation it had uncovered was one delegate who swore he was threatened if he didn’t vote for Thomas! The investigators tried to smear Reuther with Dubinsky, without any proof. In a word, they didn’t accomplish their mission. Nevertheless, the special board was continued at a big expense to the international union for another three months. Yet Addes talks about economy.
 
Wayne County Control
Besides these developments in the UAW board, there looms the bitter fight at the coming Wayne County CIO convention to be held in two weeks. This has taken on the character of the UAW-CIO convention and the Michigan State CIO convention. Both the Reuther forces and the coalition against Reuther are making every possible effort to win control of the Wayne County CIO Council that is to be set up by the special convention. At the present time, the Reuther forces control the Wayne County PAC and the Stalinist bloc controls the County Council. They are supposed to be merged into one body, to be the authoritative body of the CIO in the Detroit area.
To round out the picture of the developments in the UAW, we must cite a few more recent events.
Philip Murray, CIO president, ordered the Steel Workers Union here to disregard the NMU picket lines in the Great Lakes Strike. The Steel Workers Union officials, who up to this time had worked with the Stalinists, followed Murray’s orders. This growing antagonism between Murray and the Stalinists might be reflected in the Wayne County CIO convention.
Some people took seriously the story that appeared only in the New York Times about R.J. Thomas being ready to be drafted for president to replace Reuther, following Thomas’ ill-timed blast at Reuther a few days before the UAW-CIO board met. Actually this story was cooked up by the New York Times correspondent, Walter Ruch, simply for copy. In an informal conversation with reporters, Thomas was readily provoked into shooting his mouth off. His real feelings, bitter personal resentment over losing out as president, came out. No other reporters paid any attention to Thomas’ ravings. It would be news if he didn’t rave. However, the Times took Ruch’s story seriously, and printed it.
Another significant event. Although Richard T. Leonard at present is still in the coalition against Reuther, his position is becoming impossible because he is now facing the danger of the Stalinists taking over fully in the Ford locals, and opposing all his policies. Ford Local 600, the biggest local in the world, is dominated by the Stalinists and they have been making things very uncomfortable for Leonard. Leonard’s reaction shows signs increasingly of making him the genuine right winger of the UAW-CIO.
All these things fit together in a general pattern which indicate that the pressing inflationary crisis is bringing into being three major tendencies within the UAW, irrespective of the present line-ups, and unprincipled maneuvers. The right-wing of the UAW is coalescing under Leonard. A broad socially minded tendency is emerging under the domination of Reuther and his followers are more often being attacked as socialists. This is under severe attack from the Stalinists and from the reactionaries in the locals. Finally, there remains the Stalinist faction as the third tendency within the UAW-CIO.
The important fact about all these developments is that the hard facts of life are preventing the UAW from becoming just another union, in which a status quo philosophy suffices. The situation is forcing a clarification of political lines.
 



DETROIT, Sept. 14 – An ominous preview of the next stage in the deadly factional struggle within the UAW-CIO, and the entire CIO, occurred this past week in this events surrounding the so-called amalgamation “convention” of the Wayne County CIO Council and the Political Action Committee.
For neither unity, nor amalgamation, nor a convention was achieved, and the deep gulf between the Reuther forces and the Stalinist bloc in the UAW-CIO widened. So much so that many people talked of the events as a real split.
In order to understand the decisive significance of these events in the auto center it is necessary to review the story of the Wayne County CIO Council and the PAC.
 
Test of Strength
The Stalinists controlled the Wayne County Council, lock, stock and barrel. Reuther forces dominate the PAC. The two bodies have been functioning separately on every issue.
In an effort to achieve at least a semblance of unity, the national CIO proposed to merge the two bodies at a special convention, to which delegates would be elected on the same basis as at regular union conventions. In this case, they would follow in the main the manner in which UAW delegates were picked.
Thus, the Wayne County convention was another test of strength between the Reuther forces and the Stalinist bloc, and was seen that way by everybody. The Stalinists needed a victory if they were to keep their bloc together because they had lost the recent Michigan CIO state convention to the Reuther forces.
 
Stalinists Pack Convention
A special committee from the national CIO, composed of Alan Haywood, Thomas Burns and John Brophy, was selected by Philip Murray to supervise the Wayne County convention to assure its democratic nature and to keep the factional struggle within bounds.
Most UAW locals elected their delegates according to the rules set up, but the Stalinists in control of Ford Local 600 and Packard Local 190 did not elect their delegates according to the convention call. At Ford Local 600, in spite of protests and a warning from Haywood that the selection of delegates would not be recognized, the General Council chose them, instead of the ranks by election. A similar bureaucratic maneuver was pulled at Packard. Ford Local 600 is the biggest in the world, and the huge Stalinist delegation from there guaranteed them a majority at the convention.
Naturally, the Reuther forces objected vigorously to this packing of the convention, and their appeal to Haywood seemed to carry. Until two days before the convention, it appeared that Haywood would call it off, at least until Ford and Packard delegates were elected by the rank and file. The Michigan CIO News, for example, which appeared the day before the convention, carried a page one story, on the authority of Gus Scholle, Michigan CIO director, that the convention would be called off.
In any event, the Reuther caucus told Haywood that if the Stalinists were allowed to pack the convention illegally, they would not participate.
 
Showdown Inevitable
The Reuther forces strongly urged Haywood and Murray to stand firm against the Stalinists and permit a real convention. In fact, Reuther’s key men proposed to Murray that Tom Shane, of the Steel Workers, and a real Murray man, be made president of the amalgamated body. The Reuther forces did not propose to control the about-to-be-formed council. They proposed that Murray’s forces control it, in the interests of achieving unity in the CIO movement here. For various reasons, Shane couldn’t take it, and a showdown between the Stalinist bloc and the Reuther forces became inevitable.
The Stalinists, on the other hand, put tremendous pressure on Haywood to sanction the convention. In fact, they issued a convention call on their own through Pat Quinn, CIO Council president, and Sam Sage and others in control of the Council. They bluntly told Haywood and Murray that they were going to hold a convention and elect officers.
This is very important for an understanding of the coming period of the struggle in the CIO. The Stalinists simply rode roughshod over Haywood, who didn’t dare denounce the convention called by the Stalinist bloc because the Stalinists threatened to fight Murray openly in the national CIO Executive Board. George Addes, secretary-treasurer of the UAW-CIO, and R.J. Thomas, a national CIO vice-president as well as UAW vice-president, used exactly this kind of threat against Haywood and Murray.
The fact that the Stalinists won complete control again of the UE, by such a big majority, was one of the reasons they were able to become so reckless and brazen in their maneuvers here.
 
Reuther Stays Away
In passing, let it be noted that these events accomplished one major aim that Walter Reuther has had in mind. No longer is the clash in the UAW-CIO only between Reuther and the Stalinist bloc. The Stalinists clashed directly with Murray and his representative, Alan Haywood.
Since Haywood and Murray have been made “captives” at the present stage of the struggle, unwilling ones to be sure, Haywood did not denounce the Stalinist call for the convention. Rather, he simply left Detroit before it began, and thus left the entire status of the convention up in the air.
The question-mark status of the convention was emphasized also by the fact that the Reuther forces did not attend, and even the Stalinists didn’t dare claim that over 366 out of over 625 delegates attended. Nor were all the delegates who attended in the Stalinist camp.
Thus the convention met yesterday and passed a series of motions amalgamating the PAC and the Wayne County CIO Council. All the Executive Board members of both bodies were put on a new Executive Board and election of permanent officers postponed until next spring. The Stalinists captured the convention, to be sure, but the question remains, what did they capture?
The “convention” was supposed to meet two days, but adjourned after six hours of session on the appeal of Nat Ganley, Stalinist leader in the UAW-CIO, who sought to throw a bread crumb to Murray and Haywood by a speech in which he emphasized that this body had no authority to make policy but rather must go along with national CIO policy. Besides, another meeting would be called soon to take up the matter of the November elections. The conciliatory tone of his speech was intended more for the delegates who were worried by the press headlines heralding a split in the CIO, than for Murray, for at long last the national CIO knows exactly what the problem of the Stalinists in the CIO has become.
 
Stalinist Aims
The “get tough with Murray” policy of the Stalinists can be explained only one way. The Stalinist strategy and tactics in the next period is dictated by one main aim: Control of the national CIO. The violence of the attack on Reuther is precisely because he is one of the major obstacles in that path. Control of the UAW-CIO is an indispensable prerequisite to success.
The coming convention of the national CIO will pose all these problems clearly and sharply. Unless the entire CIO movement, and above all, the ranks of the UAW, become aroused and stop the ruthless drive of the Stalinists for domination of the CIO, there will be a paralyzing factional struggle everywhere, as there now exists in the UAW, and the, labor movement will suffer badly.
More and more auto workers are beginning to understand this entire problem and see the main point that the Stalinists are seeking to control the labor movement as an agency of Moscow so they can use it for pressure purposes in Washington. The sharpening clash between the American and Russian imperialisms has caused an intensification of the drives of the Stalinists within the CIO for power.
As an integral part of the Stalinist drive for power, they have worked out a national CIO strategy for wage increases, which includes a proposal for a general strike in all auto plants next spring. They intend putting on a “militant” cloak in an effort to win the ranks of the CIO, against which only the GM Program stands on a par. This is another real problem for Murray. Either he works jointly with Reuther, whose program can offset the Stalinists, or he faces the possibility of a defeat in the CIO.
 



DETROIT, Aug. 18 – A major showdown in the top CIO leadership on vital policies was averted at least temporarily through the adoption of a compromise formula on a wage-price policy as announced by Walter P. Reuther, UAW-CIO president, in behalf of a majority of international executive board members.
One important aspect of the wage-price policy that has been virtually ignored in the papers was the adoption by the Board of Reuther’s proposal for higher wages without price increases as the central slogan in any wage renegotiations that are going to take place.
The crisis in the UAW-CIO leadership reflected a similar situation in the national CIO leadership which is widely split into separate camps on a real program for the CIO.
Reuther announced that the UAW would re-open wage negotiations at Chrysler corporation – as demanded by a national delegate conference recently – and other companies where contract provisions permit. However, actual wage demands would “depend on what action the government takes to control prices."
Since no one in the UAW-CIO top leadership seriously expects the Truman administration to do anything of the kind, this Reuther formula would be meaningless if one didn’t understand what has been going on in the CIO leadership.
In spite of the terrific rise in the cost of living, Philip Murray, CIO president, has continually put strong pressure on the UAW-CIO leadership to prevent them from carrying out the original 5 point program recently adopted at a city-wide union leadership meeting in Detroit, as reported in Labor Action.
However, events proved too strong for even Murray to stick to his completely hopeless “do nothing” views. Especially since real rank and file pressure in the UAW-CIO for a wage raise was felt by the entire international executive board. In this connection, the whole campaign in Chrysler has been dominated by the Stalinists who are utilizing this situation to the hilt.
So for two weeks in Detroit, the UAW-CIO executive board has been meeting in secret sessions, trying to figure out an answer to the problem of inflation. In this connection, the precarious financial position of the union due to extravagant pork-chopping and machine building, weighed as a serious factor in deciding policy.
The executive board members maneuvered and tried to make deals, and shifted positions, and finally went to Washington to consult with Murray and others on policy. R.J. Thomas, vice president, stood by Murray’s “do nothing” policies, and thus broke with his Stalinist supporters. Richard T. Leonard, vice-president, likewise stood by Murray, and emerged as the genuine right wing leader of the UAW-CIO.
 
Behind Policy Maneuvers
Before the board meeting, Reuther had agreed more or less to go along with Murray, but when he saw an opportunity to utilize the clash between Murray supporters and the Stalinists, he did so. In a bloc with supporters of George Addes, secretary treasurer, and second dominant figure in the UAW-CIO, Reuther authored the compromise wage-price statement that bridges the gap between Murray and the Stalinists.
In all this maneuvering, the pressure of the rank and file, or more exactly their deep discontent over present policies, played a big role. In a sense, there is a race between Reuther and the Stalinists for leadership of this rank and file movement. The next test of strength will be the Wayne county CIO convention, which should duplicate the recent Michigan state CIO convention in importance as a battle ground between the Reuther caucus and the Stalinists.
Behind this maneuvering on policy in the UAW-CIO, and one of the reasons why Murray had to retreat in his stand against any fresh wage demands is the fact that he has the problem of a strong Stalinist bloc in the national CIO leadership, and Reuther is trying to utilize this situation for his own ends, namely to consolidate his control of the UAW-CIO.
Indications of the mood of the workers in the plants were reported to the UAW-CIO board in session, and to the national CIO leadership in Washington. In many auto plants, veterans walked out on V-J Day, either simply as a protest against their lot, or in organized expression of their resentment against the raw deal the big corporations are giving them in the factories. In Pontiac, Michigan, for example, veterans who are members of the UAW-CIO shut down the whole town in protest against General Motors refusal to give them back pay for vacations lost during military service, and which the GI Bill of Rights guarantees them. In Detroit, the biggest Chrysler plant Dodge, was shut down by veterans, and in other Chrysler plants production was crippled by a spontaneous walk-out of veterans.
Likewise, the series of quick shutdowns, 24-hour walk-outs, and slowdowns continues in many plants. These facts were known to the UAW-CIO leadership when it was meeting.
Out of all this maneuvering and confusion displayed in the top leadership of the CIO, one thing is certain. The growing pressure of the workers in the shops will not cease. The compromise formula of Reuther may become the wedge heralding a second strike wave.
In all these developments, one other thing stands out like a sore thumb. The entire UAW-CIO leadership is revealed as not standing up well before the major problems of the day. Every one of them, including Reuther, fears taking up seriously the question of real political action to supplement the economic war. The CIO leadership is going to try again to sell the ranks of labor the idea of wasting their vote by supporting capitalist politicians. This policy is a tragic blunder.
And the problem of meeting the new line of the Stalinists in the CIO, calling for strikes and militant action, has only been postponed by the Reuther formula, not settled. The big struggles inside and outside the CIO lie ahead.
 



DETROIT – The first of a series of regional veterans Conferences of the UAW-CIO was held here last week, as a preliminary to a national conference to be held in Washington, D.C., in January.
Over 100 Michigan delegates held a one-day session discussing veterans problems as union men, and outlining a program for adoption at the national meeting.
 
Seek Bonus
Even though Meyer Bernstein, national CIO veterans director, was opposed to the idea of demanding a federal bonus, the delegates unanimously re-affirmed the position of the UAW-CIO calling for a wage readjustment of $3 a day for each day served in the states, and $4 daily for overseas duty. A demand that any federal grant be paid from war profits and the fortunes of America’s Sixty families was included in the resolution on the question, of how the bonus was to be financed.
On housing, the program adopted calls for seizure of half of all hotel space by government decree, as an immediate step to relieve the housing shortage. Likewise, seizure of idle mansions was advocated.
The many deficiencies and inadequacies of the GI bill came in for criticism, and appropriate resolutions calling for amendments, etc., were adopted.
Perhaps the highlight of the conference was the virtual debate between Walter Reuther, UAW president, and some delegates from Pontiac, who accused him of not fighting for veterans vacation pay rights at GM. Reuther answered their arguments and proved they were either mislead or misinformed. It was a give and take proposition in this debate, in the democratic tradition of the UAW-CIO.
 
Oppose Conscription
Some debate took place on a resolution against militarism, and conscription. Almost unanimously the delegates opposed conscription but some disagreement on naming the causes of war occurred in discussing the whereas of the resolution. As a substitute for the resolution a motion condemning compulsory military training and pledging a struggle against all forms Of it was adopted.
Since Michigan voters have before them the question of approving a state bonus, this question occupied considerable attention at the conference. The whole idea of a state bonus arose from UAW-CIO ranks, and the fight for it has been almost exclusively a struggle of the union veterans. Here, too, the conference demanded that any payment of a state bonus must come from corporation and high income taxes, and under no circumstances from a sales tax.
Although every wing of the UAW-CIO factions seemed to be represented at the conference, there was little evidence of genuine factional lineups, for the adoption of a satisfactory program for veterans seems to be an easy thing.
 
Political Resolutions
The key question of how that program should be achieved, namely the matter of building a labor party to make possible a real solution of “veterans” problems, wasn’t before this conference. However, the question was brought up when one delegate asked Reuther why he wasn’t for a Labor Party, Everyone seemed amused at Reuther’s answer about “being practical, .and the time is not ripe.”
A mild Stalinist attempt to introduce a resolution in support of Henry Wallace got nowhere, when Emil Mazey, veterans director of the UAW-CIO and conference chairman, suggested that such resolutions properly belong in the union meetings as a whole, rather than at conferences called for working out a specific veterans program. The Stalinists withdrew their suggestions for such a resolution. In the resolutions committee, according to a report, four of the five members voted against support of Wallace and his foreign policy, but no resolution came from there in view of Mazey’s outline of the purpose of the conference.
The UAW-CIO plans a national vet conference in January at which the resolutions adopted here, and other conferences will be discussed and adopted, and a fight made for this program at the next session of Congress, according to Mazey.
 



DETROIT, Oct. 6 – Beginning of the layoffs of over 25,000 Chrysler and Briggs workers here this week was neatly timed by the corporations as a threat to the UAW-CIO which begins negotiations with Chrysler on October 20 for a cost-of-living bonus.
The drastic curtailment in employment and production at these plants reflects the growing uncertainty of the auto industry production schedules.
Shortages in steel, copper and lead have made auto production at Chrysler very spotty in recent weeks. The so-called “wildcat” strike wave that hit Detroit a week ago was provoked by Briggs corporation as a means of cutting into the financial reserves, if any, of the auto workers involved.
The short work week at Chrysler, Briggs and many other plants reflected the material shortages. Now they have become more acute.
 
Reuther Proposal Weak
In the face of this serious problem of the UAW-CIO, the only proposal made at present was by Walter P. Reuther, union president, and it was for a labor-management conference to be called by President Truman for the purpose “of heading off a depression and unemployment for the nation.”
The first reaction to this proposal in both union and company circles was that it fell flatter than the proverbial pancake. The fact that Reuther’s proposal was inspired by Philip Murray, CIO president, who twice made a similar request of President Truman, didn’t help it a bit.
Early in August Reuther tried to get such a conference in the auto industry alone, and the big companies simply ignored it or blasted the UAW-CIO for causing a “production lag.”
What is different now is the fact that both Chrysler and Briggs spokesmen say that steel shortages are the main cause of production slowdown.
 
Speed-Up More Intense
In the current issue of Business Week magazine, a study of the steel problem emphasizes the point that the steel shortage would become more acute until the summer of 1947, when it would reach its peak, and the auto industry would have a difficult time getting its present quota for production uses.
Combined with the layoffs, the auto corporations – GM, Ford and Chrysler in particular – are demanding “new production standards” – that is, the right to intensify the speed-up on the assembly lines.
Within the ranks of the union, the restless mood of the secondary leadership and the workers in the plants, has reached such proportions that the International Executive Board of the UAW-CIO is holding a special session on October 18 at Pittsburgh, to which Philip Murray has been invited. This is the reply of the leadership of the demand by nearly 40 union presidents in the Detroit area, that a special wage-policy conference of the UAW-CIO be called.
The grave problems confronting this IEB session are highlighted by the Chrysler layoffs.
 



DETROIT, Oct. 20 – Once again the UAW-CIO has been placed in the position of spearheading the CIO in the struggle to overcome the rising cost of living and lagging wages.
For two days the International Executive Board of the UAW-CIO has been grappling with the problems connected with the formal reopening of wage negotiations at Chrysler, affecting 75,000 auto workers employed there.
The importance of these negotiations was emphasized by the prresence of Philip Murray, CIO president, at the board session, in spite of Murray’s insistence that the UAW drive on Chrysler was in no way connected with national CIO policy, the facts in the case testify to the contrary.
For the national CIO, as well as the entire leadership of the UAW-CIO is on the spot, placed there by the powerful demands of the ranks of the UAW-CIO that a fighting policy on wages and prices be adopted and placed into effect immediately.
 
Ranks Demand Action
When Walter P. Reuther, UAW president, told reporters covering the conference that “The UAW would have preferred to fight this thing out on the price front,” his opinion was that of the entire UAW Executive Board. The board, including George Addes, R.J. Thomas, Richard T. Leonard and others, did not voluntarily reopen negotiations with Chrysler as was possible under the contract. A delegate conference of Chrysler,, locals demanded this action.
As prices continued to soar, a move began at Chrysler Local 7 to demand a national UAW emergency conference to work out a national strategy of fighting for wage increases to meet the rising cost of living. Over forty local union presidents in the Detroit area joined in this demand.
The special session of the International Executive Board was called as a substitute for this conference. The air, of caution described as prevailing at this board meeting arises from the fact that the entire UAW leadership is on the spot because of the rank and file. Murray’s presence was demanded by both factions on the International Executive Board because neither side was willing to take full responsibility for any course of action.
 
Wage Formula
In so far as a fundamental viewpoint on wages is concerned, the entire board, Reuther faction and the anti-Reuther Stalinist bloc, voted unanimously for the wage-price policy statement presented by Reuther on August 16 at the board meeting in Washington, D.C.
The key section of that statement is entitled Higher Wages Without Higher Prices. It reads:
“If we are to achieve and maintain an economy of abundance, we must continue to press acceptance of the basic economic fact that mass production power must be matched by mass purchasing power.
“Accordingly, our task is to increase real wages by insisting that wage increases be paid out of the higher profits of industry made possible by the economies of full production and improved technology and not passed on to the consumer in higher prices.
“The rising standard of living throughout the history of American industry proves that this can be done. The much higher standard of living which we are capable of achieving through full production, full employment and full consumption will be realized only when real wages are increased out of the profits of industry to a much higher level than ever before.”
Applying this formula to Chrysler means fighting for higher wages out of the huge profits of this corporation. The total accumulated profits of Chrysler from 1940 to 1945 were $204,000,000 after taxes had been paid. The net worth of the corporation increased from $167,000,000 to $276,000,000. Since 1941 Chrysler car prices have increased 42 per cent, while wages have lagged way behind.
The facts of the situation arc clear and known to every member of the IEB. A fight around the same central slogan of the GM strike, “Higher Wages Without Price Increases,” is indicated. But it is precisely here that the leadership is being conservative, to put it mildly.
 
Want Aggressive Drive
How the ranks in the shops feel was demonstrated this past week when Chrysler Local 7 held a successful dues drive at the Kerchival plant. There was no difficulty whatsoever in getting the vast and overwhelming majority of the auto workers to support the union drive, and union membership reached a new high in this plant as a result of the drive.
In the current issue of the Chrysler Local 7 newspaper, an editorial appears stressing the need for a fight for higher wages out of profits, and for higher wages without the speedup. There is much concern that the top leadership of the UAW-CIO might settle for a wage increase to come out of an “increase in productivity,” namely the speed-up, instead of holding to the program previously adopted.
Nor has there been any indication, except Reuther’s press statement, of a serious and effective national strategy for the UAW in this situation. Chrysler Local 7 has insisted that an over-all national strategy be adopted, and an industry-wide program be planned, including an industry-wide strike if necessary as a last resort.
Reuther said that between 300,000 to 400,000 auto workers covered by contracts which include clauses permitting wage renegotiations, would be affected by the action taken at this board meeting. The other big two, GM and Ford, were excluded, according to Reuther, because their contracts did not have such provisions.
 
Cannot Be Limited
The weakness in any union contract failing to have an “escalator clause,” permitting wage negotiations to be reopened periodically as the cost of living increases, has been exposed to the hilt in this situation.
Nevertheless, the drive for higher wages to meet the rising cost of living begins this week. Any hope of limiting it to the UAW-CIO, as Murray desires, or to Chrysler, as the top leadership of the UAW-CIO would prefer, appears doomed to failure.
The first shots in the second major round of post-war battles between organized labor and Wall Street were fired in the Chrysler arena this week. From skirmishes to full-scale battles is a matter of time and developments, neither of which is controlled fully by either side. The inexorable conflict between the organized working class and the capitalist ruling class heads for a new high and sharp point.
 



DETROIT – A growing and powerful movement among the secondary leadership of the UAW-CIO for the calling of an emergency national conference of the UAW-CIO to outline a new wage struggle policy developed this week, following action of Chrysler Local 7, spearheading such a demand.
This movement originated on Sunday, September 22, when the entire leadership of Chrysler Local 7 unanimously adopted a program presented by Nick De Gaetano, chairman of the educational committee.
 
Offers Program
The key paragraphs of the program were:
“Now with the re-opening of the Chrysler wage negotiations, are we going to assume the same role as the GM workers did by spearheading an automotive strike wave, and thus repeating the mistake of taking the corporations one at a time, causing another cycle of small strikes? I think we should follow the steel and electrical appliance workers’ example by taking up wage negotiations on an industry-wide basis.”
“Therefore, due to the present emergency situation, I recommend that our local union demand that our international union immediately call a special emergency conference to discuss ways and means in making the issue of Chrysler workers, the issue of all the automotive workers. And if strike action is necessary, let that action be on an industry-wide scale.”
The significant thing about the adoption of this program was that it was unanimous, without regard to previous factional lines in the UAW-CIO.
Subsequently, a meeting was called of all East Side local union presidents, and there Reuther forces joined with Stalinists and others in voting to support the demand for an emergency conference.
 
Arose in Ranks
Budd, local likewise passed a similar motion calling for an emergency wage policy conference.
It is important to understand that this movement arose in the ranks, and is directed, in a sense, against the entire leadership of the UAW-CIO, for the top leadership seemed to be entirely pre-occupied with or paralyzed by the deadly factional struggle.
As a matter of fact, the question of a good program for the situation now confronting all auto workers is posed by the demand for an emergency conference. Here is a golden opportunity for Walter Reuther, or any other top UAW-CIO leader, to demonstrate his ability as a leader, by coming to the fore in this movement, and by presenting a rounded-out program for combatting the inflationary crisis, and concretely, for handling the Chrysler negotiations which are to begin in the middle of October.
 



Victory for the Roosevelt pro-war faction, headed by Sidney Hillman, president of the Amalgamated Clothing Workers of America, marked the recently concluded sessions of the CIO executive council. Only the absence of Hillman, due to illness, prevented a more complete rout for John L. Lewis, CIO chieftain.
Unwilling and unable to oppose the war hysteria prevailing in Washington, D.C., Lewis angrily ate humble pie at the CIO sessions. He was afraid to renew his blistering attacks on Roosevelt’s blitzkrieg against the organized and unorganized workers in the last year.
Instead, the CIO council endorsed the Roosevelt “defense” program although Lewis knew it meant strangulation of basic union rights. Partly because of rank and file pressure, and Lewis’ minority stand against war expressed in the often quoted words, “Labor wants no part of war,” the CIO council tossed some small sop about “no involvement in European war.”
However, the patriotic speeches of the CIO leaders, including Michael Quill, Stalinist leader of the Transport Workers Union, showed that the bureaucrats were willing to “defend American interests” to the last drop of the rank and file’s blood.
 
Some Dangerous Signs
The Lewis disavowal of “Communism, Nazism, Ku Klux Klan,” etc. was the first stage in his move to clean the CIO skirts of the Stalinists, although the resolution passed against “isms” will in the future be used primarily against union militants who will fight to preserve union gains despite the war. Failure of the CIO council to back the shipyard workers’ very much justified strike in Kearny, N.J. before M-Day goes into effect, showed what contemptible cowards the bureaucrats would be after M-Day. They will not defend the inalienable right to strike for just grievances.
Failure of the council to endorse the previous Lewis stand against Roosevelt’s third term because of Roosevelt’s open anti-labor policies, revealed that Lewis has back tracked on this issue, and that Hillman, as a stooge .for Roosevelt, is gaining more influence in the CIO, although Lewis had a voting majority in the council.
 
Hedging on Unity
An open break between the Hillman and Lewis forces on the question of labor unity was avoided through a compromise resolution which meant all things to all men. The majority of the CIO council members favored the immediate renewal of peace negotiations with the AFL. Lewis said they are hopeless at the present time. Afraid to buck Lewis openly, leaders like R.J. Thomas of the auto workers, and SH. Dalryniple of the rubber workers, sought to conciliate the division. The question had been discussed in a tense atmosphere. Right afterwards, Lewis made a public interpretation of the resolution passed, giving his view that unity negotiations were not feasible at present. This caused anger and uneasiness among the other CIO leaders.
Insofar as Lewis is fighting against a unity which means chaining the entire labor movement to the Roosevelt war machine, his struggle has merit. Its weakness is that he doesn’t call openly for a unified labor movement to fight war. Silent on Hillman One of the most ticklish subjects among CIO top leaders was left untouched by the council: the question of Hillman serving on the War Resources Board. It didn’t occur to the council members to blast this Board whose purpose is to assure. Wall Street control of the American war machine. That would be too “radical.” No one thought of denouncing Hillman for taking the job of lining up labor and the youth to die again for Wall Street profits.
Thus Hillman pulled a fast one on John L. Lewis, with the aid of Roosevelt. Hillman got the job as “labor representative” on the Board, a post which Lewis, of course, was certain only he was capable of holding.
 
In Its Favor
Despite its capitulation before the Roosevelt war plans, the CIO council nevertheless did take a position on some questions which creditably contrasts with the infamous betrayal of the AFL executive council.
Opposition to the “alien bill” which can so readily be turned into a drive against unionists, the demand that the Walsh-Healy wage law continue to apply in steel and other industries furnishing material to the federal government, and a protest against revision of the Wagner labor law were voiced by the CIO council. In contrast, William Green, spokesman for the AFL council, asked for no guarantees to preserve labor standards in war-time.
It sums up as follows: the CIO council, while backing Roosevelt, still resists somewhat the government scheme of turning the union movement into a glorified company union during war time. The AFL fakers, however, have indicated their willingness to be slaves who accept company union status provided they still retain the privilege of collecting dues.
Unfortunately, the voice of the rank and file that wants peace, and jobs at a living wage; and security, was heard neither at the CIO council meeting nor in the top AFL circles.
Labor is once again being sold down a river of blood by its self-styled leaders.
 



POPULAR BLUFFS, Mo. – Standing on the rocky mounds ninety acres of land in this southeastern section of Missouri is the fortress and symbol of the Negro and white sharecroppers – “Sharecroppers camp.”
It was the gathering place a week ago Sunday of the first annual convention of the CIO sharecroppers union, representing some 5,000 sharecroppers. In its story is the whole history of these people.
Brother West took us around the camp. Its shacks made of logs or wood and mud plaster, were the homes of the 80 odd families who live there. Counting the children, this meant over 450 people seeking to exist on the “fruits” of this land.
 
Not Much – “But Ours”
One glance at the shacks told of the privations endured in winter, the bitter, cold, windy winter of this area. Looking over the potato patches and the brown dry soil, still cluttered with tree stumps, we could see the results of one year’s hard toil by a penniless, poverty-stricken and homeless people. “We didn’t have nothing to start with, we didn’t eat very often, but we built this place.”
“It ain’t much, but its ours ...” The fierce pride of ownership, of a little freedom could be felt in each word. After the famed siege on the Missouri highways in mid-Winter of 1939, the Negro sharecroppers and tenants, driven like beasts from their shelters, forced enough of a hearing on their plight to obtain some aid.
A group of St. Louis liberals, headed by Josephine Johnson, the novelist, raised funds and obtained the 93 acres for them. This gave them the opportunity to carry on a ceaseless struggle against the plantation owners.
The planters tried many tricks to crush the spirit of these people, most of them Negroes, with a scattering of white folks.
The planters tried to claim the spring which furnished drinking water. They spread rumors and sought to create dissent among the sharecroppers. They discriminated against anyone from the camp when it came to jobs. Only if an owner was far behind schedule would he call for a couple of hired hands from the camp. Wages for 12 hours are less than one hour’s pay for a rubber-worker. Seventy-five cents for full days work are not uncommon.
These starving people, working hard to raise a crop, were denied relief, kept off WPA jobs. Pressure brought some surplus commodities. Slowly but surely, the camp was built a thousand heart-aches to every foot of ground.
Nearby is a river, fine for fishing, with black bass teeming in its waters. Food for the hungry. But the sharecroppers were denied the right to fish. “Anything to starve us, to drive us off our land,” our guide told us. Someone raised a dollar, the hard way, scraping together pennies and nickels. He bought a hunting and fishing license. Perhaps he could bring some food.
He was arrested. The Law kept him in jail eight days and then released him with a warning never to be caught again near the river. Even today, while the planters fish for fun, the sharecroppers are kept away. (This is not a story of the European war refugees. Everyone knows it. This is the story of American refugees from American “democracy.”)
 
No Big-Shots Here
While we walked around the camp we could hear the thousand delegates and visitors singing their inspiring song of freedom – rich, deep voices, singing as only the Negroes can sing. It was a song of faith and hope and struggle. Of dauntless courage.
This was not an ordinary CIO convention – in a big hotel with six dollars a day expenses for each delegate. John L. Lewis wasn’t there, nor Phillip Murray nor Sidney Hillman. It was held under an open community hall, its benches crowded and the overflow standing all day in the hot sun with the brown dust sweeping through. Outside of a few white speakers like Martin Lechner of St. Louis, or representatives from the American Youth Congress, the people themselves spoke.
A big section of the delegates from Mississippi county didn’t even arrive. The union is strong there. The folks started out in truck loads at day-break to get to the convention. But the Law stopped them at the county line. Refused to allow them to pass. “It’s against the law to carry people in trucks on the highway,” was the excuse.
At another highway, Thad Snow, a liberal plantation owner, forced the county officers to allow some trucks to pass.
(Stuka dive-bombers didn’t block, the transportation. It was the Law. In Democratic America.)
 
Whitfteld Speaks
Chairman and leader, of this convention was Rev. Owen Whitfield, the courageous Negro Baptist minister who lost his home, who has been hounded and persecuted and sought at night by vigilantes. His devotion and loyalty to these people is returned by them.
When he reported on the struggle of the past years, his points seconded by loud “Amens” and “That’s Right,” we felt like crawling in a hole to hide our white skin.
Lately, Whitfield has been influenced somewhat by the Stalinists. He spoke of fighting a war here, not abroad. He quoted the Bible and he told of the need for a modern Moses. But his speech was the essence of revolt against oppression.
He warned against “prejudiced Negroes as well as prejudiced whites.” When he told of the Negro boy driven insane by a beating at the hands of the Law, and the boy’s mother shouted “That’s Right”. We were listening to another example in the 200 years history of oppression of the Negro people at the hands of the whites. And this deeply rooted mistrust was not ever going to be erased by speeches or articles. Only by Common action.
Perhaps his sharpest comments were reserved for the Ministers of his own race who refused to fight with and for the sharecroppers, lie told of writing to the Baptist council asking them to raise $5 per church in America to aid the sharecroppers.
“We’ll pay it back double in two years.” But they sent no reply.
Whitfield knows the real role of the Negro in American history. He showed how “white history books” distorted it. Washington crossed the Delaware to win American freedom, but no one tells of the 5,000 Negro troops With him, of the 400,000 Negro troops in the first world war. Of the building of America through Negro and white workers.
“You clear the lands, you till the Soil, and then they say, big boy move on.”
“You fought in the Civil War to break feudal slavery, and now they’ve made you economic slaves, no better off.”
“You fought in a war for democracy, and then they tore the uniforms off your back and said, ‘Get back, in your place. Nigger.’”
“Never again.” Whitfield concluded. And these people mean business. They have learned that they lived, and sweated and died for nothing in the past. They are willing to die for something now.
Land to work and live on. To live like men with political rights and security. To educate their children. To break the bonds of slavery, 1940 style.
 



What tragic irony that it took a Nazi blitzkrieg on Holland to focus world attention on a problem that is 400 years old: the fate of the Dutch East Indies. Once it was Portugal and Holland lighting over the fabulous riches of these islands while the Indonesians struggled for freedom from foreign domination. Today, England, France, America and Japan maneuver for control while 61,000,000 suppressed people want independence.
Situated between the continents of Asia and Australia, the group of islands known as the East Indies is almost as large as the United States. Here is some of the world’s most fertile land, and huge rubber and tin resources. For two centuries great fortunes were made through the notorious Dutch East Indies Co. When the Dutch government took away from the company its absolute right over the colonies a record was kept of the take. Under the regime of Baron van den Bosen, a governor-general, the sum of 166,000,000 pounds sterling ($830,000,000) was paid from 1830 to 1839 in forced tribute by the natives to the government.
 
Those Who Toil – And Those Who Profit
All things in the Dutch East Indies are divided into two categories: European and native. There are European courts of law for Europeans (i.e. whites) and native “justice” for the natives. Agriculture of the 5,000,000 fertile acres of land is sliced in half. To work the plantations for profit is a right reserved primarily to Europeans with a small scattering of native aristocrats carefully cultivated by the government.
To till the soil for food. This is granted the natives. Of course, all the best lands are owned by the Dutch government which leases them to capitalists on a 75 year basis. The Dupont dynasty, for example, owns 132,000 acres of rubber plantations valued at $18,000,000 and bringing a profit of $40,000,000 in the last decade. Goodyear Tire & Rubber Co. has holdings as large. Export business is a monopoly of the “foreigners,” while retail trade is largely in the hands of Indonesians. Those who profit and those who toil is another way of dividing society in the East Indies.
 
Rubber – And Blood
A new chapter in the dark history of the Dutch East Indies began when transplanting of the Hevea Brasileanis tree proved successful early in the 20th century. Rubber, the indispensable material of a machine age, found a new fatherland. Under the ideal climate and the excellent soil of the East Indies, rubber trees bloomed in the millions. Over 98% of the world’s rubber supply comes from the Far East. Of this, about 640,000 tons, or roughly 37% is exported from the Dutch East Indies. New millionaires in Holland rose by the hundreds from the profits of this venture.
Profits in crude rubber come from large scale production, from huge plantations. This means clearing the jungle. It brings malaria. And death. In one province, the death rate rose from 85 per thousand people in 1909 to 195 per 1000 in 1911, while the jungles were being chopped down. Elsewhere the story was the same. Nevertheless, employers fought against establishing hospitals. (It costs money.)
Chinese coolies imported by the thousands died by the thousands. So did the laborers shipped in from India. The terrible story is well told by Howard Wolf in his book, Rubber – A Story of Glory and Greed.
Rubber brought fabulous wealth to the Dutch rulers. It brought more misery to the natives, So, imported labor was used to prevent widespread discontent. Kanganies, or “recruiters of young pigs,” as the Chinese call them, shipped hundreds of thousands of Chinese or Tamils from Southeast India to work on the rubber plantations. The plantation owner paid from $20 to $31 a head. The indentured coolie was supposed to pay back $10 of this as transportation money. His pay was, however, 2½ cents a day and food. Trapped by the impossible demand for repayment, the rubber plantation worker became a virtual slave.
 
The Speed-Up Comes
In recent years, indentured labor or slavery has been cut down somewhat. But a new form of exploitation has arisen. Before 1927 yield per employee on a plantation was never over 1,000 pounds. Introducing speed-up methods – the rubber industry is notorious for this – production was increased to over 2,300 pounds per man in 1933. Combined with wage cuts and terrible living conditions this situation brought about a strike affecting nearly 500,000 plantation workers two years ago.
Rubber also brought the rise of a new class in the Dutch East Indies, the native producer. Although confined to small holdings, the natives could produce almost twice the present supply of crude rubber obtained from the islands. This development hurt the profit of Dutch plantation owners. so a scheme was worked out by British and Dutch interests to restrict the growth of rubber. Part of it called for cutting down the production of native holders. A heavy export tax on native producers only was proposed by the Dutch governor-general in 1934. The Volksraad, or People’s Council in the East Indies, objected furiously. It meant that thousands of native producers would be driven out of work, facing only starvation. The whole meaning of Dutch “home rule” government for the colonies became clear at that moment when the governor-general overruled the Volksraad and decreed the law into effect.
 
Freedom for the Islands!
It is, small wonder that a prominent crude rubber brokerage firm in Akron, Ohio recently declared – when asked about the fate of the Dutch East Indies once Hitler took Holland – that rubber circles feared the Dutch East Indies would declare their freedom. This is the main reason why French marines landed at a strategic port of the Dutch East Indies, and a flotilla of British destroyers anchored nearby.
Of course Britain, France and America want to keep this rich colonial plum away from Japan. Rubber and tin are vital war materials.
And Japan, too. would like to grab this area which would bolster a weakening economy. The diplomats of these four imperialist nations are engaged in bickering and bartering for a share in the loot. The American fleet stands at battle station near Hawaii to remind Japan and the other nations that Roosevelt is going to have his say in the matter. However, all four are watching something else very closely, a move of the native people for freedom from domination.
On this, the Big Four are agreed: No freedom for the Indies. It would mean freedom for the British East Indies and a sharpening struggle in Indo-China, and India. It would be a victory for the Third Camp, the camp of the oppressed peoples and the workers throughout the world. It would be a heavy blow to both camps of imperialist war makers. That is why we raise the slogan of “Freedom for the Dutch East Indies!” It is their right to have self-rule, to join other colonial people in a struggle for world emancipation from war and slavery.
 



ST. LOUIS, Mo. – In writing about the plight of the sharecroppers and their problems, there is little one can add to what Charles Edmundson. of the St. Louis Post Dispatch, said in a special article last Sunday.
“Owing largely to the failure of the Administration in Washington to stand up to the politically powerful landowners in the South, the AAA is grinding the landless rank and file in this region down into a deeper and more stupefying poverty.
“As it works out over large areas, the AAA is a frustration of the law, a mockery of democratic procedure and a tool for the exploitation of one of the most cruelly submerged elements of our population.
“According to the Farm Security Administration, nearly 2.000,000 farm people have been forced off the land – into a poverty more intense than prevails among the agricultural workers John Steinbeck described in The Grapes of Wrath. Steinbeck’s Oakies are the aristocrats of the disinherited farmers, for they have jalopies in which to start the trek to the orange groves. Those remaining behind have no wheels on which to roll.
“The writer found widespread neglect of the rights of the non-voting groups, which include practically all the rural Negroes, and, because of rigid poll taxes, most of the white sharecroppers as well.”
 
Practice and Theory
In theory, the Agricultural Adjustment Administration provides that farm subsidies authorized by Congress be divided between the landowner and the tenant or sharecropper. In practice, the landowners either keep all the subsidy outright or introduce tractors and other machinery to displace farm hands so all the subsidy can be kept. Making share-croppers or tenant farmers into day laborers who get paid the least of all, guarantees the landowners the most profit.
In theory, all “producers”, landowners and sharecroppers, or tenant farmers, have the right to vote in electing all important committees that administer the law, etc. In practice, thousands of Negro and white sharecroppers never vote. Never were told they could, and where they knew they could, it was “safer” not to vote.
 
... Can’t Vote
However, there is “democracy” in many areas. The sharecroppers and tenant farmers are herded together to vote. But any ballot which is against the landowners proposals is simply thrown out. And terror is used to keep down the negative votes. This is the kind of “democracy” which prevails especially in the delta sections of Mississippi, Arkansas and Louisiana. Also in Alabama and Georgia.
Only in southeastern Missouri where the sharecroppers union now affiliated to the CIO, received nation-wide attention through its highway starvation siege are things a little better. Besides, some enlightened landowners broke the united front of reaction and had their sharecroppers vote what they thought.
Government subsidies come in soil-conservation checks, price-adjustment or parity checks and soil-building checks. Around these payments, besides all the other handicaps and difficulties, are woven a set of rules, procedure, etc. which the average sharecropper doesn’t understand because he has been kept in darkness about his rights. So he’s hooked.
 
Vigilantes
To keep the sharecroppers ignorant of their rights, and to prevent them from struggling for their rights through union organization, the landowners band up in vigilante groups who specialize in beating up union organizers, terrorizing sharecroppers who may become union builders, and keeping the poor people down through sheer brute force.
Because there is a large supply of labor, and because it is mostly unorganized despite some courageous efforts, wages are terrible.
In California, for example, wages are supposed to be $2.10 a day and board. In this section of the country a tractor driver gets $1 a day for 12 hours work, a plowhand $.75 a day, a woman hoeing cotton is paid 60 cents for her back breaking labor. Cotton pickers get from 50 to 75 cents per hundred pounds. Less than ten cents an hour, often only 5 cents an hour for hard labor under a hot blazing sun. That is the situation-among hundreds of thousands of farm hands here.
As though that weren’t miserable enough, most of the day laborers, sharecroppers and tenant farmers are forced to buy from landowners’ stores. Prices are at least 25% higher for all things, compared to the independent stores – according to a survey made by a Church.
And. of course, there is the usual chiseling on loans or materials advanced to the tenants or sharecroppers, and the setting of all standards, purchase of all goods, and so forth solely by the landowner who sees to it that he comes out way ahead.
Is it any wonder that landowners admit, “We are sitting on a powder keg.” And they keep the explosion down by sitting down hard on the poor folks, Negro and white.
 



ST. LOUIS, Mo. – A tiny and many-colored flame of the Third Party movement flickered dimly here last week, fanned by the desires of three prominent politicians.
Unable to obtain a satisfactory deal with the Republican Party after his public bid for it, John L. Lewis, CIO chieftain, threatened to form a Third Party if the coming Democratic convention didn’t select Senator Burton K. Wheeler as presidential nominee. Lewis spoke before the Townsend national convention which cheered his blistering attack on President Roosevelt and his threat of a Third Party.
Previously, Dr. Townsend, leader of the old age pension movement, had criticized both major parties and offered to join hands with labor in forming a new party, if the Townsend plan wasn’t accepted by a major party.
Third actor in the drama was Senator Wheeler, who announced his intention of running against Roosevelt at the Democratic convention and threatened to bolt if his isolationist position wasn’t accepted by the Democrats.
Since there is little likelihood of any of those IFs being realized at the Democratic convention, it appears that the plan of these three politicians might have to be placed into effect.
 
Pre-Arranged
Apparent to everyone present at the convention was the fact that the whole series of Third Party threats was pre-arranged by Lewis, Townsend and Wheeler.
Townsend sounded off in a keynote speech to the convention. His entire talk was aimed at discrediting the Republican and Democratic parties – and paving the way for the Lewis speech. Lewis received a better reception and much greater ovation from the convention. Although he criticized the Republican program somewhat, his main barbs were directed at Roosevelt. Failure to provide adequate old age pensions, failures to solve or try to solve the unemployment problem an conscious effort to
drag America into war: these were the Lewis charges against the Roosevelt administration. Lewis demanded that the Democratic convention repudiate Roosevelt and choose Wheeler instead. Since Roosevelt controls over 75% of the delegates to the Democratic party convention and Lewis knows this, his demands can only be interpreted as a maneuver Wheeler, speaking before the Townsend convention and a “peace” rally of 2,000, warned the Democratic party against becoming a war party, and threatened to help build a new and peace party, to the cheers of his listeners who shouted “Wheeler for president.”
 
Unreal Atmosphere
Despite all the bold words and brave talk of these men, it was hard to sense an air of reality about this Third Party movement. Lewis spoke as though he were representing 10,000,000 members of the CIO, Labor’s Non-Partisan League, American Youth Congress, National Negro Congress and other organizations. Fact is that Lewis is a minority in the CIO today. Politically, he hardly speaks for it, or for the other organizations he mentioned.
Wheeler, remembering the past experience he had in 1934 with LaFollette senior, in the Third Party movement of that day, is evidently much impressed by the response he has obtained to his “anti-war” speeches and believes that a new party can be blitzkrieged into existence.
Townsend appears like a smart politician who has built up some national strength on a program of reform which he has little hope of achieving and is casting about for a deal in exchange for the votes he controls.
Since all three spoke as 100% patriotic supporters of U.S. capitalism, emphasizing their belief in defending America and South America from “aggression” and in a program of “National Defense,” one can hardly expect any serious anti-war movement from the hodge-podge organization these gentlemen might form.
Although this talk of a Third Party is not decisive in American politics, its importance was recognized by President Roosevelt when he called William Green, president of the AFL, for a special conference to discuss its possibility.
Irrespective of the weight or importance of the votes which a half-baked Third Party might obtain, Roosevelt sees it primarily as an obstacle to his plan for national unity, and thus fears it.
The stand of the AFL was made public when its publicity chief, Phillip Pearle, blasted the Third Party idea as Fifth Columnist, and also significantly announced that the AFL would not take a stand for either Willkie, or Roosevelt, if he ran.
 



Scab Convention Meets
Time magazine beat us to the punch in reporting on the annual convention of the Associated Farmers last week. Its account of this strike-breaking outfit speaks for itself. We reproduce its story, adding a comment or so at the end.
“Along California highways last week, red, white and blue billboard posters shouted: National Defense – A nation at work – Protect the open door for jobs for everyone – The open shop is the open door. California businessmen were rallying their forces for a last ditch fight with labor.
“Businessmen were alarmed by labor’s successful strike at Vultee Aircraft Corp., where workers had won a higher wage, by a State Supreme Court ruling upholding the legality of a closed shop contract. From their annual convention in Fresno, bigwigs of the Associated Farmers of California scurried to Los Angeles to huddle with members of the State Chamber of Commerce, the San Francisco Employers Association, and the Merchants and Manufacturers Association. There they discussed ways and means of nullifying the Supreme Court decision.
“Most notorious labor-baiting group in California are the so-called Associated Farmers. These Farmers track very little earth into their parlors. They were born at a meeting of an agricultural committee of the State Chamber of Commerce in 1934, when the state was being invaded by Dust bowl migrants (the Okies of John Steinbeck’s The Grapes of Wrath).
“The Okies wanted better wages, better living conditions than Mexican peons. With mounting labor costs great industrialized farms faced a cut in profits,. Shippers, canners, bankers were also vitaliy concerned. The time had come, the Chamber of Commerce decided, for aggressive action if business is to survive.
“The Associated Farmers supplied the aggressive action. During the Salinas agricultural strike in 1936 and in the Stockton strike in 1937, they acted with tear gas and shotguns. The stench o£ blood and powder hung over California’s Imperial Valley. Strikes were broken, but so was the secretive silence that had surrounded these private affairs in the Valley. For direct action the Associated Farmers turned to quieter campaigns in the state legislature.
“They went on record as favoring the complete exemption of agricultural labor from the Wages & Hour Law, the National Labor Relations Act, the Social Security Act and similar legislation, and as opposed to repeal of the local anti-picketing ordinances, to the closed shop and the hiring hall. (They did not pass a resolution endorsing Hitler. Why bother? – JW).
“Contributors to the Associated Farmers, as revealed by the LaFollete Committee, include: American Trust Co., Bank of America, Bank of California, Canners League, railroads, utilities, packers, employers associations. Claimed membership of 40,000. According to the LaFollette committee report, a truer figure would be something under 2,000. Membership includes a small percentage of small growers in the state who were scared by desperate, frequently reckless labor tactics the important membership is a large percentage of the large growers. They are the hierarchy and inner circle, and were genuinely hurt by growing labor costs. But gentlemen landowners who have closer bonds with the banks than with the soil.”
That the California big shots met in Los Angeles after this convention was no accident. For they understand that the problems of the agricultural workers and the fate of the Okies depend primarily on events in the Los Angeles area.
If 65,000 aircraft workers are organized into militant unions the agricultural workers will have a powerful ally in their struggles. That’s why the Vultee strike victory worried landowners so much.
The Associated Farmers scab outfit dreads the day we look forward to, the day when representatives of a powerful union movement call on the gentlemen and say, “Listen you dirty so and so’s, we’ll tie up every damn plant you own, unless you sign a contract giving the agricultural workers a decent wage and better conditions.” Plain language like that, backed by a union movement of over 100,000 workers in aircraft, steel, rubber, shipping, etc. in this area, is something that even a businessman can understand.
And when Mr. Donald Archibald Stevening, ex-Army officer, and new president of the Associated Farmers, blusters, “We’ll be ready soon to shift from the tactics of defense to offense,” we can smile and reply, “That’s what Mussolini said too.”
*
“Red Scare” Scares Santa
If Santa Claus failed to arrive in the homes of millions of American homes this year it was not merely because so many people were poverty stricken. He was afraid of being picked up by the FBI or Martin Dies as a dangerous foreigner and red.
So the story goes out here. And it illustrates the level of the present hysteria which continues unabated.
Hollywood, as usual, contributes its share with a garbage pail full of mystery thrillers in which Boy Gets Girl via exposing sinister Fifth Column plots.
J. Edgar Hoover, striving hard to live up to the Hollywood conception of a G-man, came through with a report on Harry Bridges as a member of the Communist Party.
Martin Dies announces another “sensational” disclosure. There are 150 German-Americans working at the North American Aviation Co. This was too much, even for the company, which pointed out these workers had been with the company for between five to ten years and were quite reliable. Dies forgot that as yet it is not a crime to be of German ancestry in the United States.
*
Leaders of the “I Am” religious racket, on trial here because they failed to account for thousands of dollars taken from suckers, used all this spy hysteria to present a defense which, to say the least, is quite novel.
Among the good deeds done in the past year by Mr. Ballard, leader of this racket, was to make a psychic discovery that three submarines of Nazi Germany were headed for the Panama Canal to destroy it.
Making Super-Man look like a chump, the I Am boss used his power with God and forced the submarines to turn back and to be destroyed.
You might think this is silly beyond words, but it was all said very seriously at the court trial here, and the newspapers printed the story as serious testimony.
Of course, having the Los Angeles Times and two Hearst rags as the main newspapers here accounts for part of this stupidity. They do their darndest to make the workers believe all the propaganda about reds and spies in an effort to confuse and divide the union movement.
*
Bridges Tries a Little “Scare”
The Harry Bridges machine came through by the skin of its teeth in selling the two year contract between the CIO longshoreman’s union and the employers. Now the Stalinists have turned to the job of crucifying union opponents.
Since the San Pedro local has prominent oppositionists it was only natural that Bridges begin his campaign here. And what a campaign.
Last week Tom Brown, secretary of the Pedro local, committed suicide because of personal worries and ill health. He was a Stalinist.
So the C.P. machine is calling that suicide a murder, and blaming it on the union leaders, headed by President Bowen of this local. If they hadn’t opposed the two year contract and criticized Bridges, Brown would have been happier and wouldn’t have committed suicide, they say.
Anybody who opposed or opposes Bridges is, therefore, morally responsible for the death of Brown, say the Stalinists.
Sounds like the Moscow trials, doesn’t it? And those trade unionists who thought that the Moscow frame-up trials didn’t have importance to them are learning by painful experience how wrong they were.
Only a GPU mentality is capable of pulling the stuff that Bridges and his men are using against the opposition in the longshoremen’s union.
“I’m staying down here until we revenge the death of Brown,” snarled Bridges at the funeral last week. But it won’t be so easy to liquidate the opposition.
*
Miscellaneous Items
After a real pressure campaign, the workers at the Vega and Lockheed air plants finally signed enough cards to help pay for a Hudson bomber for England. The bitterness against this phoney company move remains so great, however, that over ten per cent of the workers still have refused to donate time to pay for the bomber.
*
The CIO Mine, Mill and Smelter union won bargaining rights at the American Potash and Chemical Corp. it was announced by the National Labor Relations Board, following an election.
The CIO union received 476 votes to 172 for the AFL Potash, Borax and Phosphate union, and 103 for the company union. The concern, which produces war materials, is owned entirely by a British Corporation.
*
A study of the facts on the trial and conviction of Don Keppler, vice-president of the Boeing Aircraft workers union, AFL at Seattle, on charges of being a “Communist” reveal that it was a company move.
The trial board was headed by a stool-pigeon, a man who has an open record as being in the pay of manufacturers to give them labor information. He admitted that he was assisted by the FBI and the local police in framing the charges.
Our suspicion was aroused immediately when the newspaper carried the story that Keppler was to be expelled from the union and fined $5,000, Someone more familiar with the union movement would have known that to fine a person for political activities is almost impossible in the union movement. Keppler is taking the business to court, among other things.
Disunity in the AFL union on this question will hardly help it in organizing workers in opposition to the CIO in aircraft.
And the fact that AFL craft unions are putting pressure on the large Lockheed local to give them jurisdiction over various workers isn’t going to help much either. It shows, among other things, how craft-union minded the AFL still is.
Reports are that the leadership of the Machinists international are not adverse to dividing up the Lockheed workers into craft unions.
CIO officials are watching this situation closely since an open craft union move is all they need to swing over the majority of the 14,000 Lockheed men into the CIO.
 



LOS ANGELES, Calif., Nov. 23 – War department efforts to break the 9 day Vultee aircraft strike suffered a severe setback today when the U.S. Army was forced to withdraw, in disgrace, its brass hat. Major Sidney Simpson, from the negotiations between the CIO and the Vultee management.
Sensational headlines in local newspapers today screamed out the story to the general public, although unionists in touch with the negotiations knew all along what role the U.S. Army was playing in this strike. Simpson forgot he didn’t have the cover of Army censorship over the press and that he wasn’t dealing with inexperienced conscriptees under military discipline. He continually demanded that the CIO give up its right to strike. When the union leaders refused to be intimidated, he would leave the conference room for an adjacent bar and start drinking in despair.
His activities became so utterly intolerable that even the company officials agreed with the CIO statement that Major Simpson’s drunkness and his attitude were an obstacle to settlement of the strike.
 
Picket Lines Hold
Speeches by putrid Congressmen this week seeking to frighten the strikers by talk of “treason” had little effect on the local situation. Another threat by Martin Dies, notorious red-baiter, to expose “radicalism” among the strikers and the usual quota of strikebreaking editorials, and a petty frame-up on “violence” failed to budge the unionists one inch. Picket lines held firmly, although there was some justified beefing on the part of strikers against the secrecy that cloaked the first few days of negotiations.
 
Concessions Seen
Preliminary reports on the progress of the negotiations indicated that the CIO was obtaining some real concessions for the contract, and a union contract could have been signed but for Major Simpson’s sudden insistence on a two-year no-strike clause.
Chief gain of the union in the unfinished negotiations was agreement for a $0.62½ minimum hourly pay after a brief apprenticeship, and the tentative acceptance of a sliding scale of wages based on rising living costs. Negotiations continued today directly between the union and the company with John Steelman, chief of the federal labor department conciliation service, flying here to represent the government.
Last week one of the few scabs claimed to have been the victim of “strikers’ violence” but it was revealed that he gotten into a fight at a football game while drunk. Of course, the newspapers played up the first “violence” story and buried the true facts later revealed, FBI agents were circulating among the strikers and were supposed to give Martin Dies a report on “subversive” activities which is due any time now as an attempt to conceal the real issue of the strike: low wages.
As we foretold in last week’s story, Sidney Hillman, member of the National Defense Advisory Commission, did his bit to help the employers against the union. His strike-breaking statement that it was “very, very unfortunate” that the strike was called without giving him a 48 hour notice was the basis of all the propaganda against the union this week.
Hillman’s contribution to the bosses was shoved back into his teeth by the union, which pointed out that he had been notified for seven weeks about the negotiations and had done nothing to see that labor got a square deal.
 
“Talk of The Town”
Meanwhile, the strike continued to be the talk of this open shop town, an amazing display of labor strength, in the city which openly brags via billboards, “Los Angeles, open shop center of the West Coast.”
In the past, strikes were more easily broken since the city did not have large industrial plants with powerful groups of workers employed in them.
Now Los Angeles is becoming “proletarianized” at a rapid pace due to the expansion of the aircraft industry. And there is a shortage of labor for these plants. The Vultee strikers do not have the problem of worrying about scabs replacing them on the job.
The Vultee strikers are indispensable to the operation of that plant. Only a division among themselves created by the raising of a red scare, and the subsequent confusion, could bust up the picket lines.
 



West Coast labor is stirring in a manner reminiscent of the good old days of the CIO drives in 1936–1937.
Coming at a time when Roosevelt is doing his darndest to keep the labor movement in control, and to outlaw strikes for higher wages and better conditions, the present upsurge testifies that the last word has not yet been heard by a long shot from the union ranks.
In the Northwest, AFL and CIO lumber workers unions got together for a joint drive against the timber barons for higher wages.
Representatives from the AFL Lumber and Sawmill workers union and the CIO Woodworkers of America met with 360 delegates from 76 local unions last night and pledged to do everything necessary to effect as broad a tie of the northwest lumber industry as possible.
Read that again. The AFL and the CIO ranks uniting in a fight against their common enemy, the bosses. That’s the kind of unity the labor movement needs. That’s the kind we support.
Plans of the lumberjacks include a strike to begin at five Everett, Washington, lumber mills, involving 2.000 workers. This is to help effect an industry-wide tie-up already in process by virtue of a strike at Seattle, and the shut down of ten mills at Tacoma. The AFL union controls the Everett workers.
*
Unless you’ve tried to organize in the deep South or some of the towns of the mid-west, it is difficult to appreciate really what a tremendous victory the CIO achieved at Vultee, in Los Angeles.
Ever since the McNamara bombing case in 1910 at the Los Angeles Times building, this city has proudly boasted of its open shop tradition. Yes, a few craft unions were organized, and the CIO made some headway in the past, but essentially the city was open shop. Its posters still brag of this advantage to manufacturers.
The rapid expansion of the aircraft industry brings an almost inevitable change in this condition. 65,000 proletarian workers in this area are a different force than the craft unions, or the small needle trades shop workers, or the small rubber plants.
Vultee strikers, for example, didn’t have to worry about scabs. The industry is having a problem hiring qualified men. They couldn’t find 3,800 production workers if they searched the whole country. Not experienced aircraft workers.
This contributed greatly to the power of the strikers. And to their confidence.
Since 1,400 of them went from 50 and 52½ cents an hour to 62½ cents an hour, besides getting vacations with pay and other usual demands, the Vultee workers were jubilant upon returning to work.
Now this city has 3,800 workers who, unconsciously perhaps, are all CIO organizers. The strike, as is every first strike to a worker, was a real experience in life. It is something one talks about to friends and neighbors. The extra money coming in helps a lot.
Labor learned it could strike and win. Many workers here didn’t believe you could even strike, let alone win. That’s the way the newspapers put it. And too many people believe what they read in newspapers, especially about what they say about the union movement.
*
The SWOC announced the signing of two contracts here which names the CIO union as the exclusive bargaining agency and bring substantial gains to the workers.
Over 1,000 employees at the Consolidated Steel Corp. plant are effected by the union contract which includes: preferential union hiring, a 65 cent minimum wages and the automatic five cent an hour increase in the hiring rate after six months. Also there is provision for an 8-hour day, five days a week, with time and a half for overtime, and vacations with pay. Grievance and arbitration procedure was also agreed to.
The other contract was signed with the Pacific Gas Radiator Co., and contains substantially the same provisions as the consolidated agreement.
*
A last minute compromise derailed a threatened strike of 1,000 ship yard workers at San Pedro this week over a wage dispute. The ship yards involved are engaged in building small craft for the Navy’s war program.
*
Filipino workers in the celery fields were just given an AFL charter and are pressing for a union agreement which will give them more adequate compensation for their back-breaking toil at starvation wages. Very unfortunately, however, the Filipinos include in their demands the replacement of all Japanese workers by their own countrymen. Apparently they have learned little about the need tor class solidarity from their own many years of racial persecution.
There will be a real upswing in union activity among the agricultural workers in California in the coming season. The war boom with its hiring of many men in California cities slackens off the huge surplus of labor for agricultural work. The much higher wages and better conditions in industrial plants has opened the eyes of the migratory workers too, already bitter about their miserable existence. Employers are plenty worried already.
*
Emil Ludwig, pot-boiler biographer of great men, is contributing his two cents worth of ignorance to Hollywood’s mental blankness tonight with a lecture on the future of Europe.
Mr. Ludwig hints that there will be a revolution in Europe sometime during or after the war, and that society might take “some sort of collectivist form.” Translated from the confusion in his fat skull, this simply means that Europe faces the revolution of the proletariat against capitalism. It means our day is coming. And that now is the best time to build the revolutionary party. Mr. Ludwig, to be sure, will be silent on these questions. You can’t earn $500 telling the people the truth.
 



While the rest of the country is out in the cold, California basks not only in its proverbial sunshine, but in the gold reflection of one billion dollars of war orders placed by the federal government.
Out of six billion dollars in orders placed in the entire nation, California has received over one sixth. Is it a wonder that another “Gold Rush” excitement has hit business here?
Since the aircraft industries have received a big dish of this gravy. Southern California factories are humming, and men are getting jobs.
Yes, everyone knows that there is going to be a terrible hangover from this orgy of war expenditures, that a sharp collapse is inevitable. If you talk to the merchant, or the man on the street, or the factory worker, they all tell you the same thing. “It’s good while it lasts, but a crash is coming.”
So one detects a note of recklessness everywhere. It’s shown in the unbelievable high rate of traffic death, in the never-ending jangle and clatter of the vast horde of night spots, in the car buying spree that brightens the highways with the latest models. People are jittery. There is a sense of continual rush that brings back memories of Times-Square.
It’s like watching an old drunk on one last binge before he falls dead finally, long after his time.
*
There was a time when the arrival of Harry Bridges at a CIO union meeting brought an enthusiastic response from the workers. Only a few die-hard sinners, usually branded as Trotskyist or worse, failed to join in the hallelujas for the Great Leader. For Bridges was the West Coast Director of the CIO, and tended to be a personal symbol, in the minds of the inexperienced workers, of the CIO’s progress on a national scale. Bridges and his friends in the Communist Party were able to ride on this band wagon for a long time without their ruinous policies catching up with them.
But times change, as Bridges can testify from an experience he had last week at San Pedro. He came down from Frisco to speak in behalf of a two-year contract negotiated for the longshoremen’s union. The union had called a stop-work meeting so that all the men could hear him. Bridges’ appearance was greeted with loud and powerful boos.
He tried to defend a compulsory arbitration clause in vain. His rhetorical questions always brought jeers or heckling. His only argument for giving up a fight against the bosses was that those workers who now oppose arbitration were for it in 1934, when he was against it. As though two wrongs make a right. The longshoremen’s union (CIO) has steadily retreated under Bridges misleadership, and is in a weaker position.
Bridges also tried vainly to convince the men that it was all right to allow a new lift board system (technological advance) to persist and be put into use everywhere. You can’t oppose technological advances, he said. He forgot to add, however, that a union should fight to see that the workers get the benefit of the improvements, and not the bosses.
His stooges in Portland and Seattle have been driven out of control. His followers are a minority in Pedro. There is considerable discontent with his regime in Frisco. So Bridges turned to a time-honored bureaucrats’ scheme to stem the revolt. He wants to make peace with the bosses so he can make war against the unionists who struggle to improve the lot of the workers and the regime of the union. That is why he negotiated a two year contract, with further retreats from the militant demands and stand of the longshoremen of the 1934 days.
Bridges’ weasel-worded endorsement of Wendell Willkie, via 100 per cent support of John L. Lewis’ election speech, has contributed greatly to the sharp decline in his prestige and influence. A barrage of attacks from the AFL longshoremen union engineered by Joseph Ryan also helped put Bridges on the hot seat.
While it appears probable that Bridges can swing enough support to obtain an approval of the contract, it is even more likely that he will be up against a powerful coalition of forces in the coming union elections who are out to retire him for good.
*
If you drove out to Santa Monica last week by the Douglas aircraft plant, you would have thought that an armed invasion was about to be repelled. There was a whole army of bluecoats and special deputies massed near the entrance of the plant.
But it was only a CIO blitzkrieg that threatened the peace of the “Henry Ford” of the aircraft industry. Capitalizing on the Vultee strike victory, the CIO intensified its campaign to organize the huge Douglas plant by a spectacular open appeal for membership among the employees.
Of course, there is the usual anti-loud-speaker and leaflet ordinance on the statute books of Santa Monica. In the days following the Douglas sit-down strike defeat it was enforced and union organizers kept away from the plant.
But the company and its political stooges apparently learned that things are a little different right now. That the CIO could do a real job of exposing this phoney ordinance. so the bluecoats stood quietly by while CIO organizers exhorted the Douglas workers to join the union.
*
Each time there is an industrial accident in this area, the newspapers come out with bold headlines about sabotage against national defense. Since there have been some very large fires and explosions in factories here, the newspapers have had a field day.
In each case, however, subsequent investigation reveals that the fires, etc., are caused accidentally. But in whipping up a hysteria the newspapers conveniently play down this angle. As a matter of fact, the companies are directly responsible for the accidents and the murder of the employees involved. Speeding-up workers, using inexperienced workers on dangerous jobs, and lack of adequate safety measures – which cost money – are the real cause of the sudden flurry of industrial plant damage.
 



LOS ANGELES, Calif., Nov. 16 – Terrific pressure by the war department, the federal conciliation service, and Sidney Hillman was put on the 3,800 production workers at the Vultee aircraft plant here to end their strike for a- half way decent wage scale.
Called by the aircraft division of the United Automobile Workers of America (CIO), the Vultee strike, involving a total of 5,000 employees, constituted the major showdown between aircraft manufacturers and the CIO in its effort to organize the 225,000 workers in this industry.
Nearly 65,000 aircraft workers in this area alone, most of them unorganized, are watching with keen interest the outcome of this battle on which the future of the CIO in aircraft hinges.
 
Want More Pay
Burning issue of the strike, and among all aircraft workers in this district, is wages. Most plants pay a minimum of 50 cents an hour, much too low for any kind of decent living standard. The Vultee strikers are demanding a minimum of 65 cents an hour, and a five cent an hour wage increase for higher paid workers.
Seven weeks of fruitless negotiation, combined with a growing impatience on the part of the workers, forced the calling of the strike, despite repeated efforts of Hillman, and federal conciliators to settle the issues by “arbitration.”
The strike was neatly timed also to put Hillman on the spot at the CIO convention at Atlantic City, since it gives an excellent opportunity to expose him as Roosevelt’s hatchetman in the labor movement against the workers’ interests.
 
Men Enthusiastic
Approved by the international executive board of the auto workers union, the strike is under the direction of Walter J. Smethurst, director of the CIO aircraft organizing committee, and former executive assistant to John L. Lewis. L.H. Michener, international representative of the autoworkers, and Wyndham Mortimer, aircraft organizer for the UAWA, complete the trio handling this strike.
Since the strike is well organized, the workers full of pep and enthusiasm, great responsibility rests on these individuals to prevent a phoney “arbitration” agreement. They are obviously acting under guidance ol their respective political factions within the CIO who are out to embarrass Hillman and expose Roosevelt’s pre-election demagogy about safeguarding labor’s gains.
In view of the heat against any strike action whatsoever, especially in aircraft, the mere calling of this strike represents a forward stride for aircraft workers since it emphasized that the aircraft workers not only have the right to strike but can strike successfully.
Of course, the filthy newspapers and gutter sheets here are filled with howls about a “calamity” against national “defense.”
 
Fantastic Profits
However, the aircraft companies are making such huge war profits and are so dizzy from prosperity that the general reaction is in favor of the strikers obtaining a substantial wage increase.
Vultee has a backlog of $80,000,000 in British and U.S. Government orders, on which a profit of between 10 to 18 per cent is guaranteed. Everyone knows this, so the old baloney about “we can’t afford to pay more,” hasn’t been attempted much by the company.
Rather, the company is trying to make “national defense” the issue, and cleverly hides behind the skirts of the war department, the federal conciliators and the notorious Mr. Hillman.
Martin Dies, notorious labor baiter, issued another violent statement about “1,200 spies and saboteurs” in the airplants around here, as part of the preparation to raise a phoney red and spy scare to force the strikers back to work without obtaining their demands.
 
Army Against Strike
A special delegation of U.S. Army officers made their appearance today at the plant, headed by Colonel Lowell Smith, army procurement chief, in a crude attempt to impress the strikers and terrorize them.
The tremendous national significance of this strike has not escaped a single one of the various forces clashing here. The U.S. Army is bitter about the shut-down. They want the strikers forced back to work and would like to make strikes considered treason.
The aircraft manufacturers know that if the Vultee strike is won, the minimum wage of 65 cents an hour will soon prevail in all other plants and cut in on their bloody profits. That’s why they have a solid united front against the strikers, and are putting pressure on all government agencies to assist them save their profits.
 
Vital for CIO
For the CIO it is a make or break proposition. The last attempt of the CIO in aircraft ended with the failure of the Douglas sit-down strike in 1937. Its loss caused a great decline in CIO prestige in this area to the advantage of the AFL.
The AFL machinists union is a strong competitor for organization with the CIO in aircraft. The AFL has contracts covering 14,000 employees of the Lockheed Corp. here, the Consolidated Aircraft in San Diego, the Vega plant in Burbank, and the Boeing aircraft plant in Seattle, Washington. Very important is the fact that the AFL was able, despite Hillman’s maneuvers, to obtain a 62½ cent an hour minimum at the Boeing plant recently.
Aircraft workers are not primarily concerned with the question of what are affiliated with. They want to support the union which does the most for than.
The CIO strike leaders realize this fact very well. They must obtain some real concessions for the Vultee men or the CIO is on the down grade again, in aircraft.
Since each action of the top leadership was taken in closest cooperation with the shop stewards and the rank and file of the union, it is clear that the union leadership understood thoroughly the need for the most powerful kind of solidarity in view of the great forces working against the strikers. There is no question but that the rank and file is ready for any kind of struggle to obtain its demands.
Since the John L. Lewis wing of the CIO is in full charge of this strike, its future depends largely on the course of the struggle between Hillman, representing Roosevelt and his war plans, and the Lewis forces at the CIO convention.
 
Effect on Aircraft
Developments in the next few days are bound to open the eyes not only of many of the strikers but of sections of the labor movement that “national defense” means defense of profits against the just demands of the workers. The Vultee strike has created ferment among all other aircraft workers in this area, judging by many reports, and the workers are solidly behind the Vultee strikers because they know a victory there means an immediate gain for themselves. Barring a complete sell-out, all the way down the line, much more is going to be heard in the next period from the aircraft workers. Even the forcing of a retreat on the part of the strikers by the acceptance of an “arbitration board,” with its inevitable chiseling down of the union’s demands, will only dampen, but not stop the aircraft workers struggle to better their miserable conditions.
 



Union-Buster Arnold
One of the most important developments in the trade
union field in recent months has been the beginning of a nationwide
campaign against the teamsters union by Thurman Arnold, United States
Attorney General, under the charge that the truck drivers are
violating the Sherman anti-trust law through certain kinds of
contracts signed with employers.
John C. Haefele, attorney for truck drivers local
407, IBT, submitted to Arnold an outline of the procedure in
Cleveland, which requires drivers for long distance hauling companies
which have contracts with the union to turn over their loads at
various terminals in the city for delivery within the city limits by
local drivers.
Arnold, in a letter to the Indianapolis Central Labor
Union, wrote that perhaps this kind of contract was a probable
violation of the Sherman Act by a union as
“unreasonable restraints designed to compel the hiring of
useless and unnecessary labor.”
“An example is the requirement that on each
truck entering a city there be a member of the local teamsters union
in addition to the driver who is already on the truck,” Arnold
wrote.
While indicating that he is not seeking to obtain a
ruling on the legality of the procedure followed by the Cleveland
teamsters union, Haefele wrote:
“It is the desire of the officers and
members of local 407 to cooperate fully with the Department of
Justice in supporting the laws of the United States of America. It is
with this thought in mind that we are requesting a fuller
interpretation of your statement in order to clarify, justify and
determine the future acts on the part of the officers and members of
local Union 407.”
 
Cleveland Contract
Haefele’s brief describes a contract between
local 407 and the Cleveland Group of Certified and Permit Motor
Carriers, an organization of 71 operators in the Cleveland area,
which includes a clause specifying that “drivers for member
companies entering Cleveland must deliver directly to a terminal or
may deliver or pick up a load within a one-mile radius of an
employer’s terminal, but that such truck drivers may not make
deliveries or pick ups elsewhere in the Cleveland area.”
“It has been the practice of both
local trucking concerns and the union, in cases where a truck is
operated into the Cleveland Area from distant points, to have a local
union member operate such truck from the terminal to the point of
delivery,” the brief states.
“We believe that it is to the public
interest that a local man, who generally knows the city better and
who has not just left a fast moving public highway, should complete
the work of making delivery.
“The number of accidents on city
streets involving long-distance motor transports has been drastically
reduced since the system was adopted and consignees have found
deliveries more rapid.
“Of course, our men do not begin from
their service except at a terminal, unless the shipper designates
otherwise, in which case our driver meets the truck on telephonic
advice of the shipper,” the brief continues.
“We have never required that an extra
driver be (hired in addition to the regular driver on a truck
entering Cleveland on a terminal-to-terminal basis.”
“Now then, it is our opinion that the
hiring of men under the above statement of facts and by virtue of
existing agreements does not come under the category of
unreasonableness , as defined by you as a violation of the anti-trust
law.
“Immediately on the public
announcement of your views on this matter our local union
discontinued the use of a local driver to complete local deliveries
for those who were not in contractual relationship with us, and we
shall continue this policy until you have more fully informed us,”
the brief concludes.
Edward Murphy, president of local 407, and a
vice-president of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters union,
said that the procedure used in Cleveland was similar to that in many
other cities, thereby giving the Cleveland situation a nationwide
importance.
 



ST. LOUIS, Mo. – The CIO auto union completed its convention week, having endorsed Roosevelt for a third term, stated its opposition to military conscription, and elected into office supporters of the Lewis bloc within the union.
Highlights of the convention were the speech of John L. Lewis and the bitter debate on the resolution, passed by a huge majority, denouncing “dictatorships” and “aggressors” including the Soviet Union, Germany, Italy and Japan.
Lewis came before the auto workers to obtain support for his stand against compulsory military training and to summon this union to maintain its rights in face of the anti-labor drive.
“What is this country coming to when they propose to put you in jail for five years and fine you $10,000 for speaking against compulsory training?”
”The CIO is against it,” he thundered, while the delegates responded with a tremendous cheer and prolonged ovation. It was the clearest cut anti-war feeling shown during the whole week.
Warning the auto workers that a “man on horseback with dreams of imperialist conquest” would be the inevitable outcome of conscription. Lewis strongly emphasized that “war is always the answer to the prayer of defeated politicians.”
“Don’t be guided into a war hysteria merely because politicians are incapable of solving the problems.”
 
The Trouble with America
“There are 19.000,000 families in America living on less than $69 a month. That’s what’s the matter with America.
“What are the major political party platforms on this? The platforms are silent. Some day the people are going to lose confidence in the major parties to a degree that they will form their own party,” Lewis declared, again to an enthusiastic ovation. He left the question of building a labor party to the future, however.
For the first time in years, Lewis spoke with a rounded out conception of the problems facing Organized Labor. On unemployment, for example, he analyzed the “war boom” and pointed out how few people would be re-employed, while corporations got richer on “patriotic profits.”
“When the European war is ended, the Japanese-Chinese war is ended and any kind of peace established, there will be a sharp reduction in business, terrible unemployment and the whole internal economy thrown into reverse.”
Speaking of the Democratic Party platform on unemployment, Lewis pointed out that “it took three years to get a major political party to place into their platform that they will call a national conference to discuss unemployment.”
“If it takes place in the next three years,” he added sarcastically, “labor may be told that unemployment is not so pressing, for it is making guns.”
 
Hits Roosevelt
Lewis took several indirect cracks at Roosevelt notably with reference to the latter’s role in the General Motors strike where Roosevelt privately proposed to Lewis that he get the men back to work and negotiate. He also mentioned Roosevelt’s failure to enforce the Walsh-Healy Act, and the threats of former Governor Frank Murphy of Michigan against the sit-down strikers, made with Roosevelt’s express approval, during the GM shutdown.
Failure of Lewis to mention Roosevelt’s third term drive, which he was reported ready to support, was taken to mean that Lewis apparently expects to stand aloof this fall, although letting the CIO unions endorse Roosevelt.
His speech was more “radical” than any of his previous utterances against the Republican or Democratic parties, and was much more militant than many of the delegates. However, his stand against conscription, while progressive in itself, was largely negated by his bow to the needs of “national defense”. Taking a position for real and increased voluntary recruitment, Lewis made himself party to the lie that the workers have anything to gain from joining the bosses’ army, and consequently from the bosses’ war.
The convention was a personal triumph for Lewis over Sidney Hillman, Roosevelt’s hatchetman within the CIO, because the enthusiastic 40 minute ovation Lewis received when entering the convention was in marked contrast to the routine greeting extended to Hillman, a day later. Adoption of the Lewis point of view on conscription was a bitter pill for Hillman to swallow. Also, the insistence by the delegates on union rights and no chiseling was opposite to Hillman’s real policy of hogtying the unions for war purposes.
 
Fight Over Russia
Fireworks exploded over the anti-Soviet Union resolution which was introduced by the Hillman-Walter Reuther forces in a clever move to isolate the Stalinists and also slap at Lewis for his support of the Stalinists.
The resolutions committee was split on the question five to four. A Minority report was given by C.G. Edelen, president of the Plymouth Local who accused the majority report of factionalism.
When Stalinists denounced the resolution they were heckled with cries of “How about Finland!” Boos galore greeted minority speakers as a frenzy of patriotic spirit was whipped up by Hillman boys.
Part of the bitterness against the Soviet Union, however, was not merely patriotic twaddle. One delegate for example, protested the persecution of minority working-class groups. But this kind of feeling against Stalin’s regime, although shared by some delegates, was obscured in the discussion by the patriotic wave. Also, a good deal of the anti-Soviet Union feeling was directed against the Stalinists for their “rule or ruin” policy in the auto union.
John Anderson, president of Tool and Die Local 155, Detroit, and one-time Communist Party candidate for governor of Michigan, was chief spokesman for the minority report which asked that the USSR be excluded from denunciation as an aggressor. When he declared that the record of the Soviet Union in the past 20 years was something to be proud of, a loud roar of boos interrupted him.
One reactionary shouted, “If anyone doesn’t like this country and thinks Russia is better, there are boats leaving for Russia,” while other delegates put on demonstrations for and against that attitude.
 
Frankensteen Plays Safe
Richard Frankensteen, Lewis henchman, in whose bloc the Stalinists are functioning, declared, “I have been blasted as a Communist in the past and I want to support the resolution (majority report) to make my position clear.
“The rank and file consider Russia an aggressor nation, and while I have not made a study of it, I believe it is an aggressor,” he added, warning that this did not mean he was for a purge in the union. “I’ll oppose it even if I’m called a Communist again.”
George Addes, secretary-treasurer of the union, said, “I would not tolerate a resolution for a purge because it might develop into a faction fight, but if this is an attack on Russia as a dictator nation I too support the committee.” R.J. Thomas, union president, took a similar stand. When the question of purging the CPers from the union came before the convention, a reactionary motion to oust the CPers was withdrawn, and a slightly modified one accepted.
Out of the heated dispute certain things stood out clearly:

while the Stalinists are on the run, they still have a strong basis in the union, and much of the sentiment against them was of a patriotic rather than progressive nature,
many delegates leaned towards a Third Camp idea but had neither the knowledge nor the spokesman to speak for them,
the Roosevelt-Hillman-Reuther machine has a clever program to take over the union via the road of patriotism,
Lewis will pay a heavy penalty in his future struggles against Roosevelt because of his deal with the Stalinists in the past,
the political coincidence of the Lewis and the CP line today does not mean that Lewis is giving them a free hand as before in auto.

Rather, Thomas and Addes are his main hope in the UAW leadership.
The splendid idea of fighting for a 30 hour week with 40 hours’ pay was emasculated by the convention which adopted a resolution making that an “ultimate goal” and squashing a delegate who urged a general strike in auto to obtain that demand immediately.
Riding on the anti-Stalinist wave, the Reuther clique went into action to elect its henchmen as international executive board members.
Aim of the Reuther clique was to replace Arthur Case, Flint; Reuben Peters, Bay City; William Cody, Milwaukee, and Leroy Roberts of Indianapolis. Ind. with Carl Swanson of Flint; Linwood Smith, Saginaw; Lawrence Carlstrom, Racine; and Charles Shrock of Fort Wayne, Ind. Among supporters of this slate was the Catholic Trade Unionists Association.
Emil Mazey, Briggs Local president, whose record has been fairly progressive but who is now close to the Reuther forces, is opposing Leo Lamotte of Plymouth Local, an incumbent.
The New York regional post was open, Allen Haywood, CIO national director, having held it. The Toledo post was a contest, between Robert Travis, CP fellow traveler, and Joe Ditzel, a Reuther man.
In the voting, Frankensteen, L.H. Michener of Los Angeles, Richard T. Leonard of Detroit and George Burt of Windsor were re-elected.
 



ST. LOUIS, Mo., July 29 – Considerable sentiment against compulsory the delegates here to the CIO auto workers’ convention and a resolution denouncing conscription was given a fair chance of passing later this week. Since John L. Lewis, CIO chieftain came out Sunday against peace-time conscription, and the Michigan state CIO board took a similar stand last week, there will be a strong coalition of forces for the anti-conscription resolution.
Outside of this, there is little indication that the 600 delegates will take any serious steps against the war plans of Roosevelt.
The ovation greeting Roosevelt’s name and the boos for Willkie during a speech by R.J. Thomas, president, indicated the sentiment of the delegates on the Third Term. Although various locals have introduced resolutions calling for a Third Party or a Labor Party, overwhelming endorsement of Roosevelt is expected.
A survey among the best informed labor correspondents in the country at this convention revealed that all expect Lewis to crawl back on the Roosevelt band-wagon in his speech Tuesday before the convention.
 
Fire-Works Expected
Although the convention is impressive in its enthusiasm and the absence of the overt factionalism that marked previous gatherings, there will be considerable fire-works before the week is over.
Rank and file resentment against the fizzle in the Ford organizing and other membership drives is strong enough to get special mention in the convention report of George Addes, secretary-treasurer, who speaks of the “justifiable demand for increasing organizing activity in the Ford Motor Company, among competitive shops and in the aircraft and farm implement industries.” After all the ballyhoo for two years, the union leadership can record no important progress in these key fields. Of course, they will once again promise to do something. The attitude of the whole leadership is one of caution and conservatism. Pointing to some important gains:




rebuilding of the union to 294,428 dues paying members
victory of the CIO over the Martin-AFL clique
stabilization of the union




– the officers’ reports fail to mention that the previous failures were due to their own mistakes and weak-kneed attitude. Outside of some small and feeble voices wanting a clearer and more progressive stand on organization drives, the delegates, by and large, will go along with the present administration and its conservative program.
 
Neglected Hours Demand
One embarrassing problem which can not be escaped, however, will be the policy of the 30 hour week with a 40 hour pay which was adopted at the last convention but not carried out in the General Motors.negotiations, to mention the outstanding failure.
Behind the scenes of this convention are two powerful tendencies struggling to obtain control and the adoption of their policies, despite efforts to hide the fight.
In one camp stands Sidney Hillman, member of Roosevelt’s War Industries Board, and advisor to the auto workers union, with Walter Reuther, executive board member, as his main spokesman within the auto union. In one sentence their policies can be summed up as “a blank check for Roosevelt.” Complete hogtying of the once militant union to the war machine is their objective. Their supporters are taking jobs on various advisory committees of the federal government.
 
String-Along
In the second camp stands John L. Lewis, coming here personally to keep the auto workers under his domination as against Hillman, etc. Richard Frankensteen, international board member, is top dog in this faction within the union, and the Stalinists complete the triumvirate.



John L. Lewis in a thunderously
applauded speech at the auto
workers convention warned the
delegates that conscription would
“rob us of our liberties.”



This tendency too is for “national defense” but at a bigger price. It’s called the “tough” tendency by some delegates. They want more concessions, observation of the Walsh-Healy Act. higher pay, etc. They aren’t so hot for a Roosevelt Third term, but for various reasons are stringing along.
There are other delegates, unafflliated to either tendency, who feel that a more outspoken and direct attack on capitalism and war are necessary to save the union movement and to make real gains, but most of them will be swung into the Lewis-Frankensteen-CP camp.
With 269 resolutions before the convention, the Conflict between the various currents is bound to show itself time and again. Hillman is coming here Wednesday to do his bit for FDR and the war machine.
 
Lewis Gets Ovation
The tremendous ovation given to a eulogy of John L. Lewis by Thomas, the union president, during his report, indicates that the Lewis group are favored to win. The Lewis ovation was much greater than that accorded Roosevelt, and is significant as an interpretation of the strength of the contending camps. Thomas, incidentally, continues to play a middle of the road role in this conflict. His re-election without opposition and also that of Addes, the secretary-treasurer, is considered assured.
One of the explosive resolutions calls for denouncing all forms of “isms” especially Communism. Unless a compromise is reached in the this issue will allow an orgy of red-baiting and flag-waving. While part of the opposition to “isms” would be directed against the Stalinists and their black record in the auto union, the fact remains that in essence this type of resolution is 1000% reactionary.
The convention began with the singing of American patriotic songs, and also God Save the King. Repeated cheers marked the pleas for a defense of democracy and no involvement in European wars. While this scene showed the amount of nationalism among the auto workers, the concern revealed for democratic rights could hardly be mistaken for the hypocritical ravings of the politicians and war-mongers. The auto workers are deeply concerned with preserving whatever rights they possess, and preventing the growth of fascism.
 
Muddling Through
Unfortunately, as in all CIO conventions, the delegates, and the union leadership even more so, counterpose mild, cautious and timid progressive steps in a world of powerful opposition, in a world where only an audacious struggle for power offers hope for labor and humanity. The perfect expression of this muddling through attitude was the report of Thomas to the convention.
“We stand for the defense of our country. We hold that the military and naval defense and the well being of our working people go hand in hand, if our country is to be a unified force, able to withstand and defeat any threats to our existence as a democratic and sovereign nation.”
Unless the workers see through this illusion, and realize that the welfare of the labor movement rests in a program opposite to that of Roosevelt, six months from now if not sooner they’ll wonder what hit them. National defense as proposed now means the enslavement, not the liberation of labor. The compulsory military training law, which the auto workers don’t like, should serve as sufficient proof.
 



AKRON, Ohio. – New and delicate problems confront the Workers Party and all class conscious elements in the rubber industry here as the department of justice began a secret investigation of “subversive” activities under orders of Francis Perkins, secretary of labor.
This announcement aided conservatives in the General Tire Co. local of 1,000 to avert strike sentiment which had led the workers to vote by a 75 percent majority to walk out if the company didn’t agree to negotiate on seniority.
The prime purpose of the federal investigation is to answer the question, “Is there a radical element in control of the A.F. of L. in Akron and Ohio which is acting independently of the national officers and the executive council,” Miss Perkins admitted.
This latest move completes the offensive of the rubber barons to smash all progressive elements among the workers and enforce an open shop policy through terrorization.
 
The Government “Survey”
The government intimidation of the workers was first revealed in veiled hints by Hugh Friel, federal conciliator, when he spoke before the General workers, and he succeeded in temporarily frightening the union leaders.
Of course, when pressed for further explanation Friel attempted to add that a government survey of profits etc. was also part of the probe but this didn’t fool anyone.
The fact remains, clearly and openly, that the federal government is taking overt steps to crush the growing influence of the revolutionary elements among the increasingly class-conscious workers.
Unfortunately, many rubber workers do not yet realize the insidious attack can seriously cripple the recovery of the betrayed unions through the possible damage to the only hope of the workers, the party and the progressives.
It scarcely need be added that the A.F. of L. bureaucrats will join hands with the government in this dangerous attack.
 



CANTON, Ohio, June 3. – After successfully resisting for over a week the ruthless terrorism of the Republic Steel Co. here to break up the picket lines, nearly 7,000 steel workers at six plants found themselves split by a more insidious force than the clubs, guns and gas bombs of company thugs – the treachery of A.F. of L. bureaucrats whose misleadership was directly responsible for the “go-back-to-work” vote passed by over half the strikers.
Although 75 workers were sent to hospitals, victims of five brutal provocative company thug attacks, the determination of the pickets to win union recognition was undaunted and firmer picket line was established after each attack than before. Public sympathy was entirely with the strikers as even bourgeois journals criticized the terrorism of the company.
Instead of crystallizing the anti-steel baron sentiment and building a more solid strike movement which spread spontaneously for two days to four plants, the A.F. of L. sent the notorious Akron rubber organizers, who betrayed the rubber-workers, into the scene and they permitted the city officials to hold an “independent” vote of workers on the question of returning to work, giving the company ample opportunity to propagandize for “peace” and thus breaking the back of the strike.
This development came after a week of militant struggle by the workers whose heroism was unexcelled by that of any strike group since the inception of the NBA.
When the first strike was called at the Berger Manufacturing Co., a subsidiary of the Republic Steel, 350 out of 400 workers answered and formed picket lines which company thugs and armored trucks tried to smash, sending 40 workers to hospitals last Monday. Grimly determined to win, the strikers reformed their lines as soon as the tear gas cleared away.
Five plants walked out in sympathy strikes during the next two days of last week as indignation arose over the continued company attacks. The workers came out under the slogan of “Avenge the Massacres.” So strong was sympathy with the strikers following the outrages, that city police arrested four thugs one morning and fired at a company car when the strike breakers began the fifth assault on the workers.
Then city authorities proclaimed a virtual martial law on the strike scenes and declared they would hold a vote for the strikers to see if they wanted to continue. Meanwhile influence of the rank-and-file was isolated to two “outlaw” lodges of the A.A. under Clarence Irwin’s control and while they boycotted the vote, other unionists went to the polls with tacit permission of the leaders who criticized the strike as a “wildcat” since official A.A. approval hadn’t been asked or given.
In this manner was labor’s forces split since today found more than half the workers going back into the plants while others who maintained a picket line were herded about by heavily armed police.
Attempts of local union leaders to set up a general strike committee had been foiled by the bureaucrats and this marked the beginning of the split. The division of the “leadership” on boycotting the vote, further widened the breach and now the return of many strikers to work has apparently broken the back of the strike.
 



CLEVELAND, Ohio, June 10. – After a bitter five day fight, progressives in the American Newspaper Guild, having 7,000 members, swung the Guild in action as another progressive force in the American labor movement during the second annual convention held here.
The 120 delegates fought for hours over the question of A.F. of L. affiliation. Three definite forces presented points of view for adoption.
A “right wing” clique fought against affiliation because it would make reporters trade unionists. Another group insisted that affiliation to the A.F. of L. would mean approval to the reactionary betrayal of Green, Lewis, Dubinsky and other labor misleaders.
 
Affiliate Industrially
The correct position of affiliating as an industrial international but disassociating themselves from the bureaucrats was advanced by the New York delegation and certain middle-western groups aided by a few scattered guilds.
The third group gained a 72 to 57 majority to have a resolution with its policy succeed in passing as a recommendation to the general membership for a referendum vote on the question.
A “for A.F. of L. affiliation” slate of candidates was elected as progressives took command of the convention. Heywood Broun was re-elected president; Jonathan Eddy, national secretary and Garland Ashcraft, treasurer.
On the question of labor legislation, the convention voted by 80 to 40 to support the Wagner Labor Bill, despite sharp attack on it and the advocacy of a class struggle policy by militants.
An attack of the now extinct New Deal and on the A.F. of L. bureaucrats were other high points of the convention which saw the complete submergence of “professionalism” to the attitude of trade unionism.
A favorable referendum by the membership on the affiliation question seems assured as previous surveys indicated a. preponderant majority for it.
Whether the A.F. of L. will give an international charter to the guild is another question, on which opinion is divided.
 



In the shadows of Northern Ohio’s massive industrial structure with its giant rubber, steel, auto and textile factories, the working class has fought incessantly since the inception of the NRA in 1933 to establish its fundamental rights and’ organize itself for its historic task – the overthrow of American and world imperialism.
Workers have won great victories during this period when led by the Workers Party as in the memorable Toledo Auto-lite strike.
Workers have suffered foulest betrayals when controlled by the A.F. of L. bureaucrats. Witness Akron, rubber city.
The stories of the struggles have been told in the New Militant. It is unnecessary to repeat them.
But a survey of the important strikes during the NRA period has been lacking; one that will establish facts that can serve as a basis for a more thorough, more detailed understanding of the problems of the working class in this key area; one that will serve as a basis for correct perspectives; this article attempts, at least partly, to answer to this need.
It must be borne in mind that the NRA was not the fundamental factor in causing strikes. Rather, increase in productive activity (as the industrial upswing in 1934) accentuates the constant class struggle in the forces of production and gives it its sharpest form, the strike. That is, under pressure of the miserable depression wages, the speed up accompanying the upswing, the long hours, etc., workers sought to better their conditions.
Using as a basis for generalizations sixty major Ohio strikes, three characteristics of them come sharply to the fore.
 
General Features of Strikes

Two thirds of the strikes, predominantly those in the basic industries, were met with flagrant violence by local, state and county police, the national guards, all tinder the domination of the capitalist class. But in no instance did terrorism serve its purpose. The militancy of the working class hurled back this challenge. It took other means to “pacify” labor.
 
The federal government played the dominant role in effecting “settlements.” in four-fifths of the strikes. In other words, the class character of the state exposed itself in the great majority of the struggles.
 
The American Federation of Labor served as a brake in all struggles, it openly betrayed the rubber workers in three strikes, it ruined the labor movement in rubber temporarily through its policy and it served as an effective screen for the government in many cases.

Besides the rubber industry, there are many examples which should be mentioned; the Chevrolet strike this spring; the huge gas operators strike in Cleveland last year; the Columbia Chemical strike in Barberton; the Berger Steel strike; and so on and on.
While every strike had union recognition as its prime motive, this was won clearly in only two out of the sixty strikes. Pay increases were wrung from employers in ten of the strikes, being used as a “bribe” in five cases to avoid union recognition.
 
Concrete Results
Labor was organized in only four of the sixty plants involved before the NRA. Less than 5,000 out of the 65,000 workers in these strikes were union members before NRA. The weight of the factor of inexperience speaks or itself.
In sixty percent of the plants, and particularly in the basic industry plants, company unions were formed by the bosses to split the ranks of labor.
Over 21,000 of the 60,000 workers. involved in major strikes in the Ohio region were auto workers who struck in six plants during this period. Of course, the Toledo Chevrolet and Auto-lite strikes were the most significant.
The betrayed Berger Steel strike and the Weirtown and Steubenville walkouts drew 15,000 workers into open class struggle.
Textile strikes brought 4,000 workers on the picket line in three factories and three rubber strikes (in minor plants) had 2,500 workers.
What the paper results of the great majority of the strikes were can be summarized in the familiar terms, “Go Back to Work and Negotiate,” “Called Off,” “Company Agrees to Meet with Any Group of Employees,” etc., etc. Labor gained little there.
 
The Role of the W.P.
What the working class learned from its experiences is of decisive importance. One scarcely need add we are not “mechanical” Marxists – the workers didn’t learn automatically. Only where revolutionary forces drew correct conclusions and explained them to the masses was conscious progress made in the working class movement.
It is precisely in this that the Workers Party played its major and constructive role. Utilizing both an Auto-lite victory and the rubber betrayal to educate and lead the workers, the Workers Party gained in strength and influence.
Only in so far as the Workers Party is built up to play a greater and stronger role in the numerous struggles (through participating in them) will the revolutionary movement grow in America.
This must be one of our major tasks. Strengthen and build the Workers Party in the highly industrialized Ohio region.
A clear understanding of the nature and scope of the problem and of the prominent position strikes as a manifestation of the class struggle will play are necessary prerequisites to our success.
 



AKRON, Ohio, July 1. – Joining hands with William Green and other A.F. of L. bureaucrats in their latest “anti-red” drive, Frank Patino, president of the Central Labor Union here declared he not only supported Green’s move to split labor through mass expulsions but also began a campaign to oust local militants.
Patino, backed by the Summit County Labor News, announced his policy the day after the monthly meeting of the C.L.U. thus preventing an immediate reply by militants to his disruptive tactics.
It was the first open admission of Patino that he is with the A.F. of L. bureaucracy, although his previous actions in strikes had branded him as a hopeless, petty bureaucrat. His statement, widely featured in the labor paper, came three weeks after Coleman C. Claherty, rubber organizer, dragged the red herring across rubber workers’ union meetings in an attempt to scare progressives.
 



AKRON, O., May. 1. – The betrayal of the rubber workers by the American Federation of Labor bureaucracy had three significant results this week which are continuing the demoralization that set in after the sell-out agreement was foisted recently on the big three locals here.

The India Tire Co., which has a closed shop of the A.F. of L. union, locked out two hundred workers employed there when the union made wage demands last Saturday, thus continuing the capitalist offensive against organized labor in the tire industry.
 
Coleman C. Claherty, A.F. of L. rubber organizer, who acted with William Green to railroad the agreement on the rubber workers, began a terrific red scare in the locals in an effort to intimidate progressives who are trying to organize definitely against him.
 
Less than ten percent of the workers in the Goodyear union appeared at the Sunday meeting indicating how the workers are falling away from the union because of their disappointment.
 

“India Tire” Workers Fight Back
The India rubber workers have set up strong picket lines around the factory aided by the Mogadore Unemployed League and have refused to permit even company officials to enter the plant.
Although normally 400 workers are employed at the plant, seasonal decline in the industry reduced the personal to half that number.
Following an article in the Summit County Labor News by Sherman H. Dalrymple, Goodrich local president, charging the Communists with being “disrupters,” etc., Claherty has appeared at the local meetings and threatened expulsion to every “red” discovered.
The attack and red scare obviously are to divert the attention of the rubber workers from the sell-out and swing the resentment of the workers from Claherty to the progressives when they begin attacking him openly.
 



AKRON, Ohio, Nov. 11. – A two-hour “strike” of all workers in the truck tire department at Goodyear protesting a wage cut gave further impetus to the organization drive of the United Rubber Workers of America this week.
A special meeting for the truck tire builders was held at the Goodyear local hall which resulted in additional members for the union a day after the “strike.”
This was the third department in Goodyear which sat down at work while a delegation went to the management to demand a restoration of wage rates in the past few weeks.
Two well attended meetings for all Akron rubber workers were addressed by officials of the United Rubber workers union as each local prepared to resist any company attempts to follow Goodyear’s policy as agreed.
Meanwhile the “Big Five” tire manufacturers made a temporary truce in the price war which means they’ll reap more profits since they’ve reduced wages in some departments in the plants.
The Goodyear workers’ “strikes” brought temporary withdrawal of the wage cuts but in each instance the company slyly reduced piece work rates individually in an effort to prevent wide-spread protest.
However, resentment continues to increase among the workers and the union obtains new members.
These developments indicate that the possibility of a strike in the rubber industry during this peak season gains weight since only through a well-planned strike can the United Rubber Workers resist the rubber barons’ ruthless policies.
 



BARBERTON, Ohio, Nov. 25. – 6,000 organized workers in this highly industrialized suburb of Akron planned a general strike to back 300 strikers at the Ohio Insulator Co., a Dupont subsidiary, against possible use of the National Guard and martial law to smash the solid picket line, after their threat of the city-wide walkout forced the sheriff to withdraw 60 scabs and completely shut down the plant.
Aroused by the tear gas terror and clubbings by 70 company thugs against the 100 percent organized strikers, 2,000 unionists and sympathizers stormed the plant last night after they were attacked and routed the thugs and shouted:
“We’ll give you another Auto-Lite strike if you want it.”
The union went on strike ten weeks ago for a 20 percent pay raise, seniority rights, union recognition and a written agreement. It was called the “most peaceful strike in Ohio history” by the bourgeois press. But last Tuesday the company announced it would open the factory for “all loyal workers who wanted to work.” Meanwhile, Jim Flower, the sheriff, who is also a National Guard captain, hired 70 thugs to “keep peace,” and brought out all the tear gas guns and clubs bought last spring for possible use against the rubber workers.
 
The Weed Double-Crosses
A solid picket line greeted the company officials and the thugs early Wednesday. Flower, a big burly brute, called the pickets to one side and demanded peace. Just when the pickets came toward him, 12 cars filled with scabs, tried to break through. The workers grabbed stones, but a volley of tear gas and a clubfest by the thugs proved too strong.
Shouting, “We’ve been double-crossed by that rat,” the workers valiantly defended themselves, although over 20 were hurt by the gas shells and clubs. Another attack was made by Colonel Joe Johnson, an old strike-breaker and aide to Flower, at the railroad entrance against another picket line so a train could bring in food to the scabs.
As the tear gas drifted away the workers reformed their line. Flower marched out of the factory and ordered them to dissolve. He dug up a “riot act” passed in 1902 as his authority and threatened a $500 fine and 80 day sentences for workers arrested. The pickets jeered and swore. They shouted their right to picket.
 
Children Gassed
Flower replied by ordering his thugs to advance in military array – most of them were veterans. When they approached the picket line, Flower called for them to fire point blank with their tear gas guns. Five workers fell stunned. The thugs leaped to club the blinded workers. Twenty workers succumbed under the brutal attack. A crippled girl, going home for lunch from school, screamed in terror as tear gas scorched her. Three children, not over 10 years old, shrieked as gas shells broke a window in their home and narrowly missed them. A picket, defying the clubs, rushed to the house and carried them out.
An intermittent battle raged all day. The workers reformed their lines constantly, using coal and bricks to retaliate against the attacks. Word spread through the county of the terror. Workers came from Akron and elsewhere to reinforce the picket lines. Barricades were built, torn down, and rebuilt.
Union leaders called a mass meeting to protest the brutalities. All the strikers and 1,000 sympathizers attended while over 2,000 workers and sympathizers remained on the picket line.
Alarmed by the growing strength of tie workers, the thugs frantically fired more tear gas as night began to creep over the battle ground.
 
Tide Turns
A strong wind blowing from the plant towards the pickets shifted. It carried the tear gas fumes back into the factory. Soon the thugs and scabs were gasping for air and retreating.
Three main streams of pickets advanced towards the plant, concealing their movements by first, busting the glaring searchlight. A steady battery of rocks answered the thugs. The pickets met the clubs of the thugs in a fierce hand-to-hand battle without flinching. The mighty fist of labor crashed through the gangsterdom of the thugs. The gate-house, main stronghold of the enemy, was seized. Scabs rushed out with a fire hose but the workers brushed them aside. They started towards the plant entrance itself to clean it of scabs, but the wind died down. It took over 150 rounds of tear gas and plenty of reinforcements for the frightened thugs to keep the plant from being demolished. Even so, the front wall was badly damaged and every window broken.
A solid barricade was built of huge cement blocks and the workers prepared for another attack.
 
Demand General Strike
When word of the battle reached the mass meeting, it aroused the workers to a fever pitch of indignation against the company. Speaker after speaker told of the terror, women who were hurt demanded that their husbands protect them from the thugs. “No more tear gas or clubs. Disarm the thugs,” the workers cried in the meeting. “We want a general strike to defeat the company!” they cried. A committee representing 25 unions was formed to consider and plan the walkout
The Chamber of Commerce became frightened. It called two preachers and other “impartial” citizens to see what could be done to pacify the workers. This “citizens’ committee” called for a truce. Union leaders, worn out from the terrific struggle, their workers tear-gassed, dubbed and exhausted, agreed on condition that nothing come in or out of the plant and that the thugs stay within the plant. No attacks on the picket line would be tolerated. Such provocation would immediately bring a general strike, the union leaders said.
During the truce period the company refused to discuss even the critical situation. They spurned humble efforts of a federal conciliator who wanted to “ease the situation” by “compromising” the difference ; in other words, making a sell-out agreement and trying to fool the workers into acceptance.
Resentment against the company grew as truce expiration time drew near. The “citizens’ committee” begged the union leaders to continue it for another 48 hours. They replied they’d present it to a mass meeting Saturday night.
 
C.L.U. Promises Walkout
The workers, 1,000 strong at the meeting, thundered NO. Call the general strike, they shouted, unless the scabs are removed and the plant closed. We’ll go in and take them out ourselves if the sheriff doesn’t, voices added. The union leaders looked for Flower. He played hide-and-seek until midnight, and then told them he couldn’t do anything. He said this after the disgusted workers left the meeting.
Sunday brought a formal vote by the Central Labor Union for a general strike, to be called anytime needed to aid the strikers. In particular by Monday night, when the truce again expired, if the plant wasn’t closed. As the picket line began to. grow into the hundreds again today, the sheriff, realizing he was licked, withdrew the scabs and ordered the plant shut.
But the company doesn’t like this. If Flower can’t break the strike for them, they think the National Guard can. So they conferred with an “observer” from Adj.-General Marx’s office in Columbus, late today.
 
Workers Celebrate
Tonight 5,000 workers paraded in a “victory” march over the closing of the plant. A huge mass meeting followed with all organized labor in this district represented and pledging solidarity.
The workers know from the Toledo Auto-Lite strike that the National Guard can be defeated. They confidently face tomorrow, in one powerful united front against the Duponts and their tools, be they thugs or the National Guard. It will take every repressive measure possible under capitalism to keep the workers from victory on the picket line and they know it.
The workers aren’t so sure of themselves, however, around the conference table surrounded by Edward McGrady and other smooth-tongued federal conciliators whose treacherous moves can change a victoiy into a compromise. But the workers are learning and if McGrady comes here, they will be forewarned against him.
 
All Unions Involved
One thing is positively certain and realized by every adult in this town of 25,000. There is only one main issue in the strike: “The company is trying to bust the union and then the other unions will also be demolished.”
Last year the Mellon-controlled Columbia Chemical Co. officials tried to smash the union here. A picket line of 5,000 workers from Akron and elsewhere brought this company to its knees and the union gained its demands and its leaders were given their jobs back.
Now the Duponts are trying the same stunt. “But we know that a solid front against the capitalists can’t be broken and well win this strike,” a union leader said ... And so far it looks that way.
 



The railroading of the sell-out agreement arranged by Francis Perkins, Secretary of Labor and the A.F. of L. bureaucracy on Akron’s big three rubber workers’ unions this week put to shame the lousy auto-code agreement or any other previous capitulation of William Green to President Roosevelt and his other agents of capitalism.
Twenty workers at the Goodyear local walked out, half-sick, half crying, Saturday, April 13, when they received a report that Green, Coleman Claherty (his rubber organizer) and the Goodyear, Goodrich and Firestone local presidents had signed an agreement in Washington which gave away the right to strike, didn’t abolish the company unions and left all jurisdiction in labor disputes to a government board, not yet selected and having no power to enforce its decisions.
 
Nothing Is Too Low
While company union men jubilantly said, “Why it gives them nothing,” and the rubber barons smiled, an aroused rank and file prepared to fight the treacherous betrayal in the Sunday meetings. But they didn’t know to what depths the bureaucrats would stoop in an effort to smash the strike. They found out.
Claherty, red-faced and shifting uneasily from foot to foot, had scarcely finished reading the so-called agreement when a rank and filer at Goodrich, shouted, “Where’d you get the guts to bring back that god-damned sell-out to us?” to the thunderous applause of other workers. More criticism was hurled as Claherty retreated and finally sat down apparently defeated. His henchmen then began their work. Smooth tongues argued, “we must support our leaders,” and similar blather. It seemed to do little good. A vote was called. About one third of the Goodrich workers raised their hands in approval. The chairman said: “It evidently has passed.” No negative vote was taken after the meeting was over Goodrich workers walked out cursing, looking lost and humiliated. Claherty had “won over” the strongest local union.
 
The Rout at Firestone
Firestone was next. Shouts of betrayer, sell-out, down with the A.F. of L., bitter threats, more curses and eloquent speeches by progressives but to no avail. “Goodrich won’t walk out and you boys can’t do it alone. Why not be sensible. This is just a foothold, we’ll get more later.” Three hours of this and the Firestone workers gave up in disgust.
Goodyear workers were better prepared to meet the onslaught. Four days ago the progressives realized what would be done. They began organizing for a fight. Reports of the Goodrich meeting came in and inflamed the workers. The meeting began at the same time as Firestone’s. Regular business took an hour and then John House, president read the “agreement.”
A progressive from the rear immediately made a motion to repudiate the “agreement” signed. House ruled it out of order and said the approach would have to be a positive motion. He won.
 
A “Bold” Faker
Then a barrage by progressives placed throughout the hall sent House scurrying to cover. “I’ll bust any guy in the face that says I want this agreement or that I sold out. You boys decide this,” he temporized.
“We’ve had 18 months of boards. This is full of loop holes, Claherty has betrayed us. This means proportional representation. We don’t want to depend on the government or Francis Perkins!” progressives argued while the Goodyear workers cheered them on.
A recognized progressive leader got up. He took the agreement from House’s hands. He could barely speak he was so indignant. He threw the agreement on the floor, “It’s not worth a damn. This is what I think of it.” Shouts of approval encouraged him ... then the telephone rang. “Firestone boys are giving in, looks like they’ll approve the agreement.” The speaker almost bawled; other progressives became sick in the pits of their stomachs. But they didn’t give up for a while.
However, after nearly two hours of denunciation, and when the progressives had exhausted their ammunition, a Claherty-ite took the floor. More promises, more “stick-by-the-leaders” and the government ... slowly the game became clear. Workers began to walk out, their faces dead set, the pain of betrayal was clearly evident.
When opposition began to die down, Claherty appeared – very nicely-timed entrance, of course. He pleaded eloquently as workers turned their faces in disgust. He winced when someone shouted “Betrayer,” but only momentarily. “The two locals used reason and you can’t go out alone,” he carefully began. Soon the demoralization crept in. Even progressives looked discouraged, lost in a dark labyrinth. The vote of approval passed by a small majority.
 
The Specter of Black-Listing
Workers left quickly after the meeting, shamefaced, disappointed, tears gleamed dimly in some eyes. A few brave workers openly charged, “dictatorship from the top,” although expulsion was imminent. Progressives went home as one goes to a funeral. The dark specter of company blacklists, the black shadows of betrayal, the laughs of company union men haunted them.
The A.F. of L. bureaucracy had negotiated an “agreement.”
 







Latest Strike Aspects at a Glance
The Cleveland Federation of Labor and the Metal Trades Council have formally pledged their support to the Akron rubber workers’ union.
F.J. Dillon, A.F. of L. auto head in Detroit, announces that “in the event of a strike in, the Akron rubber factories we are prepared to give support”.
“Impartial observers,” say press reports, “are practically unanimous that the walkout (in Akron) will be under way before the present week is ended.”
Secretary of Labor Perkins has stepped into the Akron situation, conferring with company officials, in hope of averting the strike of rubber workers.





AKRON, April 9. – Akron’s 30,000 rubber workers stand poised and ready to strike against the provocative attacks of the Goodyear, Goodrich and Firestone companies and establish union recognition. Certain
outstanding facts this week indicate that the rubber struggle is the most important political event for the working class since the New Deal.
The strike is purely defensive in character. Insolent rejection of all A.F. of L. compromises, lay-offs, wage cuts and every other means of antagonizing labor have been used by the rubber barons to provoke a strike.
The National Manufacturer’s Association, pushed by Dillon, Read and Company, the Wall St. bankers, is directing this offensive. The 3,000 armed guards, the barbed wire fences, the sand-bank entrenchments – these are the forces of repression which the capitalists are bringing to play.
 
Major Battle of 1935
The purpose of the industrialists is plain. They want to smash the union completely and show the working class that the dreaded open shop is here to stay. A defeat for the workers in rubber would have nation-wide effects. It would mean that the capitalist offensive against the workers was succeeding and the American proletariat was being defeated in its first major combat with capital in 1935.
The issue of the Akron situation is the right to organize. The capitalists want to drown this fundamental right in workers’ blood.
Furthermore, the whole future of the American Federation of Labor is involved. Green, having definitely committed himself to a strike, is playing his last card, being pushed by circumstances to such a position. All the A.F. of L. class-collaboration has failed. The capitalists have insisted on class struggle, feeling sure of themselves. Either outright capitulation and ruin in rubber and elsewhere or a fight faces the A.F. of L. and it seems to have chosen to fight. Of course, one or two more maneuvers can be expected. Probably Green will appeal to Roosevelt directly, but it doesn’t seem possible that he can control the rank and file, who want to strike.
 
Sentiment Militant
The rubber workers are rapidly seeing: the entire political aspect of the situation. “This will be a minor revolution”, is the sentiment of many rank and filers.
Coleman C. Claherty, A.F. of L. organizer in rubber, has himself declared that the key to the entire labor situation is in Akron. If the rubber workers win, it spells the doom of the open shop in steel, auto and other industries. He says the A.F. of L. is concentrating its entire strength behind the Akron workers.
The working class is showing amazing militancy. Flying squadrons, military squads, outlining of strategic spots in the companies’ fortresses – for such the factories are – these and other strike weapons are being utilized and will play a prominent role in the battle. While newspapers and preachers – in particular preachers – cry against the workers, the workers calmly continue to get ready for a stiff battle which can only be described as impending civil war.
The workers’ ranks continue to grow. The strike vote proves that. Scabbing will be done only by few misguided workers, if they can get in. It doesn’t seem likely that they will.
Of course, the A.F. of L. has promised nation-wide support. This promise must be made a reality. Otherwise the struggle of the Akron workers against the entire capitalistic structure will be made more difficult.
 



AKRON, Ohio, April 11. – While Akron, seat of the rubber industry, became more of a war camp daily this week as Goodyear, Goodrich and Firestone tire companies prepared a huge force of deputies to smash any strike, the rubber-workers were gaining strength but were in danger of making fatal errors in their battle against the rubber barons.
A strike vote at the Goodyear local was overwhelmingly for a walkout, according to a survey, and labor was heartened by the large number of workers who voted. Although the local seldom had over 1,000 at the largest rallies, nearly three thousand cast ballots.
The Goodrich and Firestone locals, always considered much stronger than the Goodyear union, are expected to show greater strength in their strike vote this Sunday and should pull out more than half the plants, which have nearly 20,000 workers.
 
Danger In Strike Delay
The first danger that confronts the Akron workers is the possibility that they will be induced by William Green, president of the A.F. of L., to accept a compromise something like the auto-code agreement. Tactics of the national A.F. of L. chiefs so far have been purely those of trying to club Congress into passing the unsatisfactory Wagner bill through strike threats.
Waiting too long before actually striking in order to fulfill all A.F. of L. constitutional requirements has already seen one important week pass by and more delay will tend to cause a downswing in the rising strike sentiment. Meanwhile the companies ship carloads of tires out and stock all their warehouses in event of a shutdown.
The company tactics continue to be that of provoking labor. Firestone, ordered by the National Labor Relations board to drop the company union, instead orders a strike vote to be taken by the company union.
 
Company Maneuvers
This follows on the heels of similar moves by the two other companies whose company unions voted “overwhelmingly” against a strike. This was done for propaganda purposes as full page newspaper advertisements claim that only a minority of workers want to strike, according to their ballots!
Two citizens committees have been publicly formed for the purpose of averting a strike. Of course, alleged liberal ministers, and prominent business men head the list of potential strike-breakers.
Union leaders refuse to give any date for the actual walkout on the theory that it would harm labor’s chances, although it could hardly be before April 8. There is danger, though, that this is but a camouflage and no official strike will be called.
 
Rank and File Restless
In that event, even the rubber companies think that a spontaneous rank and file movement will carry out the plans. In fact, the companies have taken every possible precaution to prevent a spontaneous walkout being effective this week, so restless is the mood of the rubber workers.
The most serious defect of the rubber workers is the lack of experienced strike leaders as time and again good strategy was not used to swing all labor behind the sending struggle. This seems to be overcome by the aggressiveness of the workers.
Issuance of a proclamation forbidding mass picketing, deputizing of hundreds of unemployed including National Guardsmen, erecting of barbed wire fences and other military precautions shows that the struggle will be a bloody one as workers refuse to allow any scabs to work while companies are determined to break the picket lines.
 



AKRON, Ohio, March 8. – A significant turn with
far-reaching implications was made by the American Federation of
Labor here today with the establishment of an alliance between the
auto and the rubber workers’ unions to work together in the
current campaigns for recognition and the “threatened”
strikes in both industries.
Suddenly changing previous plan to bring John Lewis,
U.M.W.A president, here, the A.F. of L. had Francis J. Dillon, chief
auto organizer speak at a mass meeting of all rubber workers unions
here and pledges were exchanged to aid each [other].
Thus the A.F. of L. was finally forced to admit the
close relationship between these two basic industries. Rubber tire
production depends primarily on sales to the auto manufacturers and
they have admitted that a strike in the auto industry, if begun, must
likewise be met with a similar strike in rubber as a tie-up of the
auto industry would automatically close Akron factories.
This latest move can best be interpreted as an
attempt of the A.F. of L. to bolster its weak position in the auto
industry and its rapidly weakening role in rubber by building
prestige through this vague “united front” It is also an
attempt to display a strong front to manufacturers in the vain hope
of thereby obtaining recognition without resorting to strikes.
However, Dillon told the rubber workers that April 1
was the date set for action in Detroit and this was followed by a
speech of Coleman Claherty in which he said rubber manufacturers
would be given one week to begin negotiations or a strike would be
called.
That the workers mean to take these two organizers at
their word was shown by the tremendous applause which greeted them
whenever militant tones were adopted in their speech and especially
when threat of a strike was made. The Goodyear, Goodrich and
Firestone locals are sending committees to try to begin negotiations
this week with the manufacturers. A strike has been threatened if
manufacturers refuse.
 






BULLETIN
AKRON, O, March 28 (By wire) – Big three unions are delaying strike action pending approval from A.F. of L. on overwhelming strike votes at the Goodrich and Firestone plants.
The Goodyear has been granted the right to take a strike vote this Sunday.
3,000 deputies have been sworn in by the companies and organized into Vigilante committees. The bosses are preparing for a long siege.





AKRON, March 24. – Akron’s rubberworkers’ unions were swiftly mobilizing their growing forces this week for a walk-out on Monday, April 1, in what promises to be the most bitter struggle of labor for its rights since the great strikes of last spring and which should mark the rise of a great strike wave this year.
Unions at Goodyear, Goodrich and Firestone plants, the big three of the tire industry, have made strike plans and are preparing to be the spear-head of an industry-wide fight against the arrogant and notoriously open shop robber barons.
The unions are demanding recognition, abolition of the company unions and a 30 hour week. These have been insolently turned, down by Goodyear. Firestone and Goodrich are expected to follow.
A simultaneous strike is expected to begin at Los Angeles, Cal., where the big three companies maintain their most important plants outside of Akron.
 
Scabs Ready
The companies have already hired thugs from strike-breaking agencies in Youngstown, Ohio, supplied the sheriff with a large stock of tear gas bombs, and are planning to run in scabs, if necessary to smash unionism once and for all, company spokesmen have admitted.
Although the peak production season of the tire industry has passed and hundreds of workers have been laid off, the unions are determined to make a stiff resistance to any attempts to smash them and it is openly predicted by spokesmen that the battle will be a real one.
The fact that the unions have not more than fifty percent of the 30,000 workers involved in the three factories in their membership is expected to be overcome when the walkout is begun since the plants work in three shifts and militant pickets can prevent anyone from entering on the second or third shift with the picket lines being established on the first shift at 7 A.M.
 
City Tense and Expectant
The city is tense. The entire city, predominantly union labor in character, can be swung to firm solidarity with the strikers if a determined and militant course is pursued by the strike leadership.
Highly-bribed “company union” scabs will try to work and will be guarded by the out-of-town thugs. A call for National Guards is felt to be a matter of a day or so after the strike is called. And this will aid in crystallizing resentment against the companies. The memories of Toledo, not over 100 miles away, are still fresh in Akron workers’ minds.
A rapid increase in membership has heartened the onions and given them much additional strength. While they are still far short of the number they had last year (over 70 percent of the workers were in the A.F. of L. then), the long-promised action is finding a warm welcome among the workers. One local alone reported 626 new members in the last two weeks.
Support of the organized auto workers has been pledged and union leaders declare that the A.F. of L. unions in Detroit will walk out at the same time. Along with this, the rubberworkers will need the backing of all organized labor throughout the country in the forthcoming struggle. A victory at Akron would greatly strengthen unionism throughout the country.
It is the duty of class-conscious workers everywhere to do their utmost to help win this strike. Our party at Akron has been prepared for the strike and will be in the forefront of the struggle.
 



A burning example of what workers can expect from the current and much ballyhooed A.F. of L. unionization drive in auto and steel industries’ was seen in the “great offensive drive” of William Green which began in Akron Sunday, Feb. 24 for the rubber industry.
Green’s son-in-law, William Shepler, attorney for the rubber unions, openly told the Akron rubber workers at a mass rally which started the campaign, that the “A.F. of L. knows it can and will help management keep Communism from rising and that industry is slowly beginning to realize it.”
High praise for President Roosevelt followed the attack on Communism, Shepler saying that “We are fortunate in having a President whose government we know is on the side of the workers!” This, despite the open break with the A.F. of L. which Roosevelt made when the auto industry code was continued recently!
Coleman C. Claherty, special organizer for the rubber industry and close associate of Green, then urged the rubber workers to join the A.F. of L. and quit being “dumb” by remaining in the company union. In other words, he blamed labor for the deliberate betrayals he had made in the past.
The Firestone local, containing about 2,000 members (formerly it had 8,000) has threatened to split from the A.F. of L. unless something is done. The other two big unions at the Goodyear and Goodrich plants which combine with Firestone to make the basis of the rubber industry, have lost over half of their 16,000 membership, and dues aren’t coming in.
Most important of all, all three of the big locals planned a strike vote. Claherty hopes to divert the energy of the workers into a futile campaign. He completely ignores the fact that Akron labor dropped out of the A.F. of L. because of its inaction and that it would flock back if strike action was taken against the arrogant rubber barons.
 
The Willoughby Strike
The militant strike of the Ohio Rubber Co. union at Willoughby. Ohio, about 45 miles from Akron, is having an effect here. There 400 workers are facing 450 scabs and 200 gunmen directed by the notorious strike breaking agency from Cleveland, the Associated Industries.
The brutal beatings of 12 strikers, the terror caused when strike breakers and professional gunmen threw tear gas bombs at school children in a “playful” mood, not only aroused the populace of Willougbby, which is backing the strikers, but caused resentment in Akron.
After Claherty and Shepler left the meeting, a misguided but sincere A.F. of L. field organizer, George Roberts, who is leading the strike at Willoughby spoke briefly and aroused the rubber workers into a fever pitch when he told them that “You have to tell all labor boards to go to hell, while we were trying to arbitrate the company was hiring in thugs.”
“Rubber workers in Akron and throughout the world can only obtain their demands by striking and the quicker you realize it the better you’ll be.” He shouted to the wild applause of the audience. Of course, he is rather young and inexperienced, and doesn’t mix well with Claherty.
The Willoughby strike is the beginning of the open battle in rubber by workers for their most elemental demands. The company was about to give in to demands for abolition of the company union and the granting of seniority rights. However the Associated Industries, founded 25 years ago and “guaranteed to break any strike”, stepped into the picture with the approval of the Cleveland chamber of commerce. (Cleveland is nineteen miles away.)
Since then, the citizens of Willoughby have seen their streets swarm with armed thugs, many of them with criminal records. They saw the strikers get clubbed and gassed unmercifully. The strike, which is now in the second week, appears to be entering its most serious stage. The scabs (most of them were workers who didn’t walk out when the strike was called) want to leave the plant where they have been imprisoned for a week, but can’t because of the thugs.
 



A tremendous step forward in the direction of organizing workers in basic industries was taken by rubber worker delegates at their convention which formed an international union through the far-reaching consequences of their actions.
The rubber workers repudiated by an overwhelming majority the antiquated craft union, class collaboration policies of the A.F. of L. bureaucracy as represented by Wm. Green and the executive council.
They broke the stranglehold of the officialdom over the rubber workers’ unions which had virtually ruined the trade union movement in the rubber industry and reduced once powerful unions into mere skeletons.
The rubber workers did what the auto workers and other unionists bad not succeeded in doing – cleansing their ranks of the Clahertys and other misleaders who only lead them from one defeat to another.
 
Adopt Militant Program
The rubber workers adopted a militant program for organizing through drives the rubber industry – one of America’s leading open shop industries.
The rubber workers, through fighting successfully for the election of their own officers, smashed Green’s avowed intention of appointing their officers and gave him a blow which will have even great er repercussions at the coming national convention of the A.F. of L. for the rubber workers are prepared to fight with other progressives for industrial unions and thus wipe out the craft base for the present bureaucracy.
Officers were picked whose personal honesty is beyond question who have the confidence of the rubber workers, who are earnest, sincere and continually learning the meaning and significance of the class struggle. The president is a man who already is rallying the ranks of the deserted rubber workers around the banner of the autonomous international with immediate increases in membership.
 
Learning Through Struggle
This much they have done. In addition the rubber workers learned much through fighting. They tore away the illusions from their own eyes of the “greatness” of Green and his cohorts.
Workers in all unions who have been fighting desperately against efforts of the bureaucrats to curb them can and should take heart from this notable victory against reaction in the labor movement.
There are many reasons why the rubber workers have been able to win, so far, in their struggle for self-control with its consequent favorable possibilities.
The lessons of the auto workers’ convention aroused the Akron delegates to a boiling point of indignation which made them sensitive to every move the bureaucrats attempted at the convention.
The crime of the auto workers’ international brought home sharply the truth of the ideas constantly pointed out to them by a small group of progressives that the bureaucracy would do anything to keep in power and they must organize to fight against such reaction with its fatal effects on the unions.
Behind this immediate cause lies the long and hard work of forces like the Workers Party to point out the correct road to the rubber workers in their search for paths which would lead to a strong union movement. Efforts of progressives who arose from the working class itself without stimulation but through bitter experience with Claherty and Green, came to a climax at the convention.
The result of the convention attests once more to the fact that only through careful education and work along class struggle lines can the working class prepare itself to march forward to increasing victories.

Build a progressive bloc with correct policies based on the experiences of Minneapolis, Toledo, Detroit and the other scenes of class struggle!
 
Rally forces around the slogan of democracy in the trade union movement.
 
Protect the rights of militants who lead in every fight against the betrayals of the officialdom of the top!

The rubber workers have won a victory, but that is only a start.
Every local must have its progressive bloc carrying on a daily struggle for the ideas accepted by the convention so that those delegates who stood by the bureaucracy go down defeated and exposed to their fellow-workers.
 
Organization Plans
The resolutions on organization call for special efforts to bring the workers back within the fold of the union. Sentiment for rejoining the unions is strong in Akron and throughout the country since the hated bureaucrats went down in defeat. No time should be lost to take advantage of this fact.
Special plans must be made to unite completely with progressives throughout the country so that a solid bloc will confront the A.F. of L. executive council and its antiquated ideas at the forthcoming national convention so more workers in basic industries and elsewhere can be made free from the stranglehold of the present leadership.
 
No Compromise with Misleaders
An uncompromising struggle must be waged against the misleaders in the future. The seven craft unions in the rubber industry must become amalgamated in the new international. Demand that the next national A.F. of L. convention grant that right. The clause in the new charter confining membership only to rubber workers engaged in production of rubber products must be eliminated so all employees in the rubber shops can join in one great union.
The Workers Party has continually served in the past as the beacon light for leadership in the struggle to build a powerful labor movement in the rubber industry. It first warned the workers of the coming spring betrayal. It first called for building a progressive bloc to rally all forces at this convention against the hold of the bureaucracy. It pledges itself in the future to do everything in its power to aid the workers in their fundamental battles for uniting themselves into a powerful movement.
We will do everything possible to make the United Rubber Workers of America a stronghold of the working class against any onslaughts of capitalism or any of its agents.
 







BULLETIN
Akron, Ohio. – A smashing victory against Green and Claherty was won when delegates to the rubber workers’ union convention by 44 to 9 votes rejected a resolution asking Green to appoint officers. Green said he accepted the mandate as final, and left town. He pointed out that the rubber workers had also rejected his financial support and advice – a hint of what is to come. The Claherty camp is now working to get him elected president “legally,” while progressive forces are concentrating against him.



* * *
AKRON, Ohio. – The rubber workers’ convention to form an international union here this Thursday was expected to parallel closely the auto-workers’ recent convention at Detroit with the A.F. of L. bureaucracy headed by William Green again usurping all workers’ rights and forcing a reactionary leadership on the new international.
Exactly as Francis J. Dillon, auto organizer, kept secret all news about delegates, proceedings, etc., of the auto convention, so Coleman C. Claherty, A.F. of L. rubber organizer, has not revealed any facts about the oncoming rubber convention.
 
Plan Rigid Control
William Green has publicly announced that the new rubber workers international will be set up under A.F. of L. control; in other words he will force into office his lackeys despite any fight the rubber workers make against his dictatorship.
This will be done under the guise of “the rubber workers need the advice and counsel of experienced leaders in the formative period of the international,” so says Green. In practice it means a continuation of the bankrupt leadership of Claherty and his assistants whose policies have reduced the unions from over a 30,000 membership to a scant few thousand.
Another false argument to rationalize the dictatorship of the bureaucracy is the same one used in Detroit. “The A. F of L. executive council will finance the convention and pay the officers,” Green says. After he said that in Detroit the auto-workers found they had to pay the bills.
 
Seek to Appoint Officials
An international charter carrying a provision that the A.F. of L. executive council through Green can appoint all officers “temporarily” will, no doubt, be presented by Green for adoption with the warning, “take this or nothing.”
Against this provision will be centered all the strength of the progressives. If this fails, and it seems probable, a fight will ensue to prevent Green from automatically appointing the officers.
Another move being watched for is that Green’s henchmen will support George Roberts, an assistant to Claherty, for the presidency since he is a delegate from Goodrich local and his election would remove the unsavory stench caused by Green in Detroit through his flagrant methods. Such an action, however, would not bind any of the rubber workers who expect it.
 
Industrial Unionism
Industrial unionism is the second major issue before the delegates. There are seven craft unions in the rubber industry. Since some of them are very weak and virtually inconsequential, it would not be above Green to assimilate one or two of them in the international union as a sop to the workers. This depends on how strong the opposition to the bureaucracy becomes.
Plans to carry a protest to the national convention of the American Federation of Labor are being made in the event Green and his cohorts use the outrageous methods which marked their actions at the auto-workers convention.
The rubber workers likewise feel certain that the convention will be packed with delegates from locals miraculously revived by Claherty out of town in order to assure the bureaucrats of automatic control of the sessions.
 
Rubber Workers Aroused
The indignation aroused by Green’s treacherous methods in Detroit has been reflected among the workers here who have seized eagerly all reports from the auto-workers convention and most of the delegates realize what sort of a convention they are facing.
The ample warning received by the delegates from the experience of autoworkers will probably hare a two-fold effect. Oil in the form of minor concessions to the rubber workers will be used by Green to smooth the “troubled waters.” A crystallization of more anti-bureaucracy forces will strengthen the small progressive bloc elected as delegates.
Feeling for an independent union has not been entirely allayed as rubber workers recall vividly to mind the two-year history of their struggle for an international union which threatens to be climaxed with another betrayal.
Expulsions in the spring of 1934 thwarted a move for an International union. Then the United Rubber-workers Council was formed at a national convention to head the unions but Claherty became president and again kept the reins of control.
Now after months of delay, a convention is to be held which all indications say will be another “Detroit affair.”
 



CANTON, Ohio, Sept. 1. – After a string ensemble softly played I Love You, William Green, reactionary president of the A. F. of L., surrounded by a chamber of commerce president, some state politicians, two priests and a coterie of conservative trade-unionists, preached the philosophy of class-cooperation at a dinner given here in his behalf – and then went into a veritable frenzy to whip up another “red scare.”
His after-dinner speech and the dinner itself would have been the envy of a rotarian or any other bourgeois club. But this was but a prelude to and an indication fl what workers, waiting throughout the country to hear what he would say, would actually get.
Green spoke before an audience of not over 2,500 workers, a sign of his rapidly declining prestige and an ominous warning of how he will fare in the future with the workers.
Coming fresh from Detroit where he had treacherously foisted an ultra-reactionary leadership on the new auto workers’ international union, Green still dared to shed crocodile tears over “our democratic rights for which we must fight.” He meant his right to continue betrayals of labor, as for example, at the coming rubber workers’ convention.
Green told the workers, whose standard of living has been falling to an even more miserable rate than before the Roosevelt administration, that “The nation is emerging from a long-continued period of distressing and painful economic experience,” and also that “the economic horizon is becoming brighter.”
 
Horns and Wings
Making a “fine” distinction between “decent employers” and “ruthless, irresponsible employers,” Green pledged himself to help the “decent employers” against the competition of the latter in the hope they might toss him a few bread crumbs, so to speak.
Despite the rubber strike betrayal, the Chevrolet strike compromise, the failure of the A.F. of L. to try seriously to organize basic industries on industrial lines; the clubbing down of WPA wages by the Roosevelt administration; the increased misery for the unemployed; despite these and hundreds of other glaring facts that speak eloquently of the failure of the A.F. of L. top leadership, Green bragged of “substantial progress” made by him and his cohorts.
He had nothing but praise for the so-called “Federal Security Act,” whose provisions are meaningless to aid the unemployed in obtaining even an existence. Outside of saying “Congress and the administration made a grave mistake” when they failed to accept and apply the prevailing wage principle on WPA work, no criticism of the anti-worker, capitalist controlled Washington administration was made!
Green again offered as his solution for the inherent contradictions of capitalism with its devastating toll of unemployment, misery and slavery of the working class, the 30-hour week.
But it wasn’t what Green said alone which showed so clearly his poverty as a labor leader and the sources of ideas for betraying the fundamental interests of the working class.
It was in what he didn’t say that he was so clearly exposed!
 
Amnesia Grips Bill
With world imperialism about to send millions of workers to horrible death in war which will inevitably draw America in, Green made no mention of the Italian Fascist aggression in Ethiopia!
With the federal government drastically reducing relief to unemployed, bringing untold misery, not one word was said in condemnation of these criminal policies!
With the sly father Coughlin attempting to build an independent company-dominated auto workers union right on the heels of the bonafide auto workers convention, Green fears to think even of the consequences let alone exposing of Coughlin!
With all the black, infamous record of Roosevelt and his administration with its serious consequences to the welfare of the working class – the effects of the NRA, the spending of hundreds of millions for war preparations but not much for relief; the role of the government as strike-breaker in every strike; and so on – with all this record, Green ignores the administration, in fact, he praises it for bringing “economic recovery” ... to the capitalists!
Thus, in every serious problem facing the working class, we get from Green exactly what one would expect from a labor faker ... The working class gets nothing!
P.S. The Minneapolis truck drivers will be interested in knowing who the clergyman was that sat with Green enjoying a fine, fat meal. None other than Rev. Francis J. Haas! He’s still up to his old tricks, trying to fool labor. But thanks to the Minneapolis drivers, we have the Indian sign on him.
 



AKRON, Ohio, Sept. 16. – Delegates here were rallying around the banner of their autonomous new international union, the United Rubber Workers of America, this week to consolidate the gains of their tremendous victory over William Green and the A.F. of L. bureaucracy.
Led by progressives, the delegates resisted successfully every effort of Green to choke down their throats through threats and intimidation the reactionary leadership of Coleman C. Claherty, symbol of the betrayal policies used in the past two years by the bureaucrats in the rubber industry.
They refused to compromise whatsoever on the issue of democratic election, sending Green fleeing from the convention with the roar of their protest over his dictatorial policies at the auto-workers convention, ringing in his ears.
 
Refuse to Bar Communists
They wiped out of the proposed constitution a clause which would bar “communists” from the new unions.
They told Green bluntly that the “A.F. of L. leadership today is too antiquated to give the workers in mass industries correct leadership.”
They declared they would appeal to the national convention the ruling of the executive council of the A.F. of L. that the rubber workers couldn’t organize on an industrial basis.
Backed by unions in Akron who are already sending protests to Washington, the delegates are demanding Green withdraw his threat of no financial support to the international unless he can appoint Claherty.
They passed resolutions unanimously protesting the Italian Fascist aggression in Ethiopia and urging the workers of the world to unite in a fight against German fascism.
Progressives Take Heart
At this writing, the delegates were preparing the groundwork for further attack against Claherty and Green in order to prevent them from still obtaining control of the new international by hook or crook.
Anti-Claherty forces in the Central Labor movement took heart at the victory of the progressives and immediately voted back into good standing delegates whom he had succeeded in ousting.
The Akron typographical union passed a resolution demanding that their international officers fight for financial support of the new rubber workers international at the next meeting of the executive council and they sharply criticized Green for his threats against the rubber workers.
Already rubber workers began to rejoin the unions from which they had fled after the A.F. of L. bureaucracy’s treacherous betrayal this spring during the strike threat.
The only serious threat on the horizon which faced the delegates was the perplexing question of selection of officers. There is a possibility of a split between Akron and out-of-town progressives over which man should become president
 
Defeat Green 44 to 9
Smashing through every treacherous move, every ruse and false argument, the rubber workers brought to a brilliant climax their terrific fight lor democracy by overwhelmingly voting 44 to 9 against a resolution which would sanction Green’s appointment of president.
The blunt repudiation of the A.F. of L. bureaucracy and its disastrous policies in the rubber industry was so decisive that Green, to save his face, declared. “I accept your judgment as final. No one can ignore the preponderance of your vote.”
The defeated resolution would have given him the approval of the convention to appoint Coleman C. Claherty, his rubber organizer, as president of the new international. But, as predicted in the New Militant, the rubber workers were so incensed at Claherty and his policies that his defeat was a foregone conclusion.
To show how strong the anti-bureaucracy feeling was, it is only necessary to realize that the resolution defeated was a compromise by the bureaucracy to the delegates. It specified that all other officers be elected. All Green asked was “let me appoint Claherty.”
 
Green Threatens Delegate
When Green spoke for the resolution he threatened Thomas Burns, of Chicopee Falls, Mass., a leader for democracy, because of an alleged association with a dual union movement in the rubber industry.
Burns took the floor in his defense and flung back into Green’s teeth every argument used against him. In fact, he proved that Green had appointed Phillips, a dual unionist, to a high post where Burns first met him. Burns proved that Green, not he, had associated with the dual unionist.
The progressive bloc began its fight for democracy by presenting Green, when he arrived at the convention, with a petition signed by 40 out of 47 delegates asking for democratic procedure and election of all officers. From then, Green and Claherty were on the defensive.
The bureaucracy went so far as to threaten reporters time and again, newspapers said, for printing accounts of the inner-struggles and thereby, indirectly, exposing each move of Claherty and Green. Mention of the auto workers’ convention by anyone brought panic to the bureaucrats.
 
Green Bars Industrial Unionism
Although delegates were prepared to fight for industrial unionism Green effectively stopped that by reading a mandate from the executive council which declared that those who accepted the international charter must obey the following provision: “To organize all rubber workers in mass production of rubber products, same not to include building and construction employees; making and installing machinery employees, and employees engaged in maintenance work or in work outside the factories.
In other words, the seven craft unions in the rubber industry will keep their independent existence and the rubber workers are left facing the possibility of disastrous jurisdictional disputes.
Green told the delegates, “You can neither accept, reject, or change this charter. It is conferred on you.” A move to fight the provision at the next convention of the A.F. of L. has begun.
 
“Surprise Move” of Bureaucrats
The bureaucracy tried a “surprise move” the second day. A resolution, introduced out of order was presented for appointment of Claherty. Only two out of seven of the resolutions committee had signed it. It was supposed to be 21st. Nothing was said of the majority resolution which asks for election of officers, through “non-concurrence” with the majority.
An illegal clause was attached to the resolution. It requested financial aid of the A.F. of L. The twofold clause was thus introduced so that the delegates would vote themselves out of financial support from the A.F. of L. if they didn’t vote to accept Claherty. Everybody saw through the move.
Green took the floor, urging the passage of the resolution. His stooges followed but to no avail. The central theme of their false arguments was, “If we don’t let Green appoint Claherty, we’ll have no money to support the new international.”
 
Progressive’s Reply
A progressive neatly shattered Green’s argument that the international needed money, should accept money and therefore pass the resolution. He answered. “We need your money, we’ll take your money and support, but that has nothing to do with the question of election of officers.”
“We can have our own president and officers and still take your money. In fact, we hope to!” he added as Green blustered. “We aren’t voting down the support of the A.F. of L. by defeating the resolution. That part doesn’t belong in the resolution and we’ll change it later.”
Another delegate scored the A.F. of L. leadership as antiquated. “We need an industrial base for the A.F. of L. if it is to survive.”
Powerful and blunt argument by S.H. Dalrymple, president of the Goodrich local for the right to elect officers added much weight to the cause of the progressives as Dalrymple is recognized as one of the leaders in the rubber unions.
“We’ve been promised for two years our own international. The rubber workers will join us if we keep our pledges. I would rather go down defeated after fighting my best for democracy than face the charges of the workers who would say we betrayed them,” Dalrymple pointed out.
 
Thunder of Protest
When the roll call vote began on the resolution of appointment of Claherty, a tense silence reigned, shattered only by increasing “Noes” which continued until they sounded like a thunder of protest against Green’s machinations and trickery.
Enraged beyond control, Claherty charged Burns and others of “distorting and lying about their past.” A heated argument followed with delegates lambasting both Green and Claherty for lying. Burns even arose and called Claherty a “g— d— liar.”
A constitution was adopted after clauses barring “communists, I.W.W.’s and members of other dual union organizations” was changed to exclude naming of political parties.
“We’d do better to exclude all republicans than communists,” a delegate argued.
Another clause preventing caucusing on union questions outside the local hall also met with defeat as progressives continued to establish democracy in the new international.
Both clauses had been placed in the draft of the constitution on the bequest of Claherty who saw in them powerful weapons against the progressives if he became president.
 
Progressives Prepare Slate
The progressive bloc which has been able to rally most of the delegates with it on every vital question is preparing a slate of candidates for officers and also watching for further moves by Green to attempt to regain control of the international.
Resolutions asking A.F. of L. help to aid financially the new international were expected to be introduced and passed. This will again place Green on the spot. He pledged support of the convention even though defeated.
Pay for officers was picked as: president, $3,200; vice-president, $2,700; secretary-treasurer, $3,000. Union’ dues are $1 per month and initiation fee, $2.
The preamble of the constitution has a clause recognizing the class struggle and declaring that the international will do all necessary to further the economic and social advance of the rubber workers. It recognizes the failure of capitalism and the necessity for its abolishment.
 



AKRON, Ohio. – Two problems occupied the attention of progressive rubber workers this week as they continued to organize a bloc to wrest control of the federal unions away from the A.F. of L. bureaucracy at the approaching convention for the formation of an international union.
Attempts of Coleman C. Claherty, notorious betrayer in the threatened strike this spring, to reduce the number of delegates from the Akron unions was being fought successfully by the progressives. At the Firestone local, Claherty’s efforts to reduce the delegates from 16 to 4 were defeated. However, he will try the same thing in other unions.
His purpose is to cut down the Akron delegation so that he can control the convention through the out-of-towners who are more under his influence. Progressives at Goodyear local are meeting this week to plan their fight next Sunday when delegate election comes out.
The problem of selecting a slate of candidates which will swing the majority of delegates behind the progressive bloc is another question confronting them.
 
Claherty’s Maneuvers
Claherty will back either George B. Roberts, his assistant, who was a rubber worker, or else back John House, president of the Goodyear local, who while sincere, is easily led by Claherty. Many workers seem to like either Sherman H. Dalrymple, Goodrich local president, or Thomas Burns, A.F. of L. organizer from New England rubber plants for the presidency. Burns led a strong fight-against Claherty last year at the rubber workers convention and has a good deal of prestige. Since then he has become an A.F. of L. organizer and his position is not clear. The workers will have to prevent a split in their votes or else Claherty’s candidate will win.
The progressive bloc will announce a slate of candidates this week too. A serious attempt will be made by the progressives to coordinate the local workers so that they will present a united front against the bureaucracy.
William Green is expected to preside at the convention which means that he, personally, will try to place into office a hand-picked bunch of reactionaries so he can control the rubber workers in the future. His presence will make the progressives’ job more difficult but they realize it. One thing however appears certain, Coleman Claherty is definitely on his way out as rubber organizer for the A.F. of L. He has been told he will be removed by virtually every union in Akron. The Mohawk local won’t let him even come to any of its meetings!
The convention must be used to place progressives in control. Then the unions must be built up so that they can wage a successful strike for wages and recognition and reduction of the speed-up.
Engrossed in the trade union work, rubber workers are inclined to forget at least momentarily the long time perspectives necessary for the rubber industry to insure the working class correct preparation for its historic task – the overthrow of American capitalism. For this the Workers Party pledges its loyal assistance and support.
 



AKRON. Ohio, Aug. 26. – The pet dream of William Green, reactionary A.F. of L. president, that the coming rubber workers’ convention to form an international union be a puppet show, with him pulling the strings, came nearer realization this week as prominent tools of his policy were elected among the delegates.
The selection of George Roberts, A.F. of L. organizer, as a delegate from Goodrich local, was of particular importance for it lent strong confirmation to the suspicion he was being groomed as president of the international union by the Green bureaucracy which seeks to continue its strangle hold over the rubber workers.
Although the majority of delegates from Goodrich and Firestone local are preponderantly conservative trade unionists, a goodly portion of workers favoring industrial unionism and local autonomy also were picked as delegates. And these two questions are the key issues of the convention.
The Mohawk and General Locals selected men known widely as holding anti-A.F. of L. bureaucracy sentiments and thus express the feelings of the great majority of file workers.
Another move of the A.F. of L. bureaucrats is the starting of a membership drive after the selection of delegates and before the convention which they will try to utilize to create an impression at the convention that the rubber workers, by joining now, have always approved their policy!
The “red scare” so often used before the voting on delegates has died down temporarily since leading progressives were defeated. Of course, it will be revived at any time during the convention set for Sept. 12 if the rank-and file begins to get out of hand.
 



AKRON, Ohio, Aug. 5 – Issuance of a call for a rubber workers union convention tentatively set for Sept. 12 to form an international union affiliated with the A.F. of L. has spurred progressive elements to form a block to take control away from the A.F. of L. bureaucracy and has brought sharply into light the forces which will clash at the looming convention.
Coleman C. Claherty, rubber organizer for the A.F. of L., and his assistants, are uniting reactionary forces throughout the country in an effort to keep their strangle hold on the rubber workers, as per instructions from their boss, William Greene, who has announced he will attend.
Leading “industrial unionists” in the A.F. of L. bureaucracy probably including John Lewis, United Mine Workers president, and others are quietly encouraging a few misled workers in the hope that they can control the Akron delegates to the next national A.F. of L. convention.
The Stalinists are concentrating their entire Akron strength to gain control of the progressive bloc and thereby make an entry into rubber and keep out the Workers Party from exerting any influence. The usual run of slander and lies against the Workers Party is the only weapon the C.P. has to accomplish their latter aim.
The Akron branch of the Workers Party is working steadily to convince workers of the correctness of our policies and bring them into the Party, not only because correct perspectives must be given before and at the convention but because our primary task is to build the Workers Party.
It is doubtful that any one force will have a commanding position at the convention. But the workers must become more alert and understand more clearly the numerous underhanded methods being used to swing them behind the A.F. of L. bureaucrats and also the Stalinists.
Claherty is spending bis time and money creating small locals in out-of-town plants so he can have mechanical control of the convention. His story about the Youngstown local is an example. He reported a large mass meeting and a good local after a trip their to organize a minor plant. Actually, less than a dozen workers joined!
Flattering letters from the Lewises are used by these reactionaries to subtly win the progressives to their banner and thus give them more control in the A.F. of L. A few misled workers seem to fall for this. All the reactionaries really want is not a strong union, but votes to oust Green so they can take his place and then continue his betrayals.
The Stalinists tell rubber workers that the C.P. has 20 presidents of the autoworkers unions with them and that they are going to run the autoworkers convention to form an international next month! So the rubber workers are supposed to believe their only hope lies in uniting with the C.P.!
We let the past record of the Workers Party here speak for itself. The only leadership, the only warning of impending betrayal, the first call to progressives to unite after the Claherty and Green sellout this spring was given by the small but active group here!
As the Workers Party first agitated for a strike; first brought to Akron the lessons of Toledo and Minneapolis strategy in strike, so we are trying again to give the rubber workers correct perspectives.
We want to repeat for emphasis. Only insofar as the rubber workers understand the nature of the forces contending in the industry and adopt the ideas of the Workers Party, will the labor movement in Akron progress.
 



AKRON, Ohio, Oct. 28. – The prelude to a new epoch in the history of the labor movement in the rubber industry is being written by the United Rubber Workers of America since its inception as an international union following two years of constant defeats for the workers under the reactionary leadership of the A.F. of L. bureaucracy.
Not only did the rubber workers distinguish themselves by freeing the unions here from the stranglehold of William Green and his henchman at their convention but now they are leading a fight against the establishment of an eight-hour day and wage cuts. Non-union members are rapidly returning to the fold.
Sunday night a mass meeting with the young officials of the international union as speakers was attended by nearly 2,000 workers,the largest gathering since the fall of 1933 when the unions were just formed.
The futile “effort” of the Goodyear company union to fight against the 8-hour day under the pressure of the 12,000 workers in the two plants here has neatly exposed the lies built by Goodyear in the 20years existence of this tool, and swung more workers into the bona-fide union.
 
Union Active
The United Rubber Workers’ leaders took quick advantage of the exposure of the company union. A committee went to the Goodyear president and demanded a return to the six-hour day. Mass meetings were held. A picket line was established around the entrance of the Goodyear plants, urging the workers to rejoin the union.
The Union Buyers club held militant demonstrations at the factories pleading to all workers to join the union so that a real fight against the starvation policies of the rubber barons could be made.
These facts indicate what the temper of the rubber workers has become as the rubber barons are trying to foist the cost of a price war upon the backs of the already underpaid workers.
Significant too is the open letter written by the independent union leaders who have been fighting the A.F. of L. since they were ousted for trying to form prematurely the international union. These leaders praised the United Rubber Workers of America and asked for readmission into the ranks of the bona-fide union.
What has caused this seemingly sudden lift from the apathy of last spring after the betrayal by Claherty? What does the future hold for the rubber workers in view of the facts of today? These are questions in every progressive’s mind which need an answer.
 
Struggle of Rubber Barons
We have already mentioned the valiant fight against Green and company. This gave self-autonomy and an opportunity for the rubber workers themselves to guide their union.
Then the inexorable laws of capitalism forced the rubber barons to try to save their profits, defeat their competition and fight for monopoly control of the industry which created the basis for the present upswing of labor.
To defeat competition Goodyear, Firestone, Goodrich and the others had to sell tires and other articles for lower prices. But they wanted to make profit so they naturally wanted to cut wages. That’s why they introduced the eight-hour day under which a worker toils 40 hours a month more but receives only $3 extra! In other words, he gets longer hours and a wage cut.
The workers began to fight against this move. At Goodyear the company union was meeting. It claimed to be there to help the workers. That’s why 150 workers jammed the meeting and asked for the return of the six-hour day.
But the move of the company union naturally failed. John House, Goodyear local president, told the workers at a mass meeting that “the company union will never bite the hand that feeds it. Join our bona-fide union and we’ll really fight together against the rubber barons!”
 
Fight for Six-hour Day
The other union leaders took up the cry. Warned by the New Militant, the progressive and other unionists were prepared for the rubber barons. They used the slogans advocated in these columns: Fight for the Six-Hour Day! No Wage Cuts! No Discrimination in Lay-offs!
“Only through the United Rubber Workers of America can the workers fight against the attempt of the companies to lower the miserable standard of living!” This message has been patiently explained to workers at meeting after meeting. The futility of the company union moves has helped greatly in establishing this truth.
Boldly the leadership of the international is trying to meet the challenge of the rubber barons. Holding mass meetings; the picket lines; patiently teaching the facts to the workers; these are correct steps to rebuild the unions.
But there is much more that can be done and must be done if the challenge is to be met successfully. And the first thing is the necessity of realizing that the federal government, despite talk of Madame Perkins, won’t do anything.
 
No Illusions in Boards
Remember, this same woman helped in the rubber betrayal this spring. Likewise, at best she will only appoint a fact-finding board. But the rubber workers know the facts. Smaller pay checks with more work speak for themselves.
No illusions must be tolerated regarding the role of the federal government. It has in the past, it does today, and it will tomorrow do all in its power to aid the rubber barons. For It is their government, not the workers’.
The workers must realize that the simple act of their joining the union will not mean that the companies will be frightened into returning the six-hour day. Quite to the contrary. The rubber barons will fight more strongly than ever against the workers.
What is necessary is to educate the workers into seeing that organization can mean something only if it has the correct program, not only of what they want, but how the workers can achieve it Bow they can re-establish a six-hour day.
Capitalists have never given anything voluntarily. Only insofar as the rubber workers have strength to force their demands, by strike,if necessary, can they succeed in wresting back the wages and hours stolen from them by the companies.
Until this is permanently established in the workers’ minds and they are convinced they must fight with this fundamental idea as their policy, the hard work of the union leaders will come to naught.
The basis for the defeats by the A.F. of L. bureaucrats lay in their class-collaboration philosophy. They preached that the rubber barons and the workers were brothers. The latest company moves tears this falsehood apart. The lesson of this should not be forgotten.
The progressive platform of the United Rubber Workers, which recognizes this idea – class struggle – as embodied in the constitution, gives a good basis for winning back the rubber workers. Events favor the union too.
 
Continue the Battle
By starting a fight against the companies, the union leaders have aroused the workers who are rejoining the ranks. They are writing a good first chapter in the future history of the labor movement in rubber.
A continuation and intensification of the efforts, bringing more sharply into play the progressive program adopted at the rubber workers’ convention, will bring further success and stave off the drive of the companies.
The battle between the capitalists and the workers has begun more openly than ever before in the rubber industry. Final victory can come to the workers only when the present decaying system is buried in its grave and a socialist economy under the control of the workers lives in its place.
In this epoch of imperialism with nothing but war and further degradation of the workers’ standards possible under capitalism, no illusions can be tolerated that security and peace will reign in the future. This can come only under a workers’ government. These thoughts must prevail among the rubber workers if they are to fight correctly against the rubber barons. In them lies the only hope of victory!
 



AKRON, Ohio, Oct. 21. – Pressed by a powerful demand from 6,000 workers in plant 2, the Goodyear company union revolted against company orders to approve a shift from the six to an eight-hour day and created consternation among the rubber barons as the feeling against the brutal company policy spread from plant to plant and brought tenseness throughout this rubber center.
The lower body of the dual-house company union, which was formed 20 years ago after the 1913 strike, took this sensational action two hours after the company placed the 6,000 plant II workers on an eight-hour schedule, thus laying off hundreds of them!
Over 150 workers stormed the company union meeting and thundered their protest which caused the thirty-two “representatives” to bolt from the purse-strings of the company. The meeting had been called to hear that cruel exploiter, Paul Litchfield, company president, attempt to explain his order which would send thousands of workers into the streets facing a hard winter without food or shelter. Litchfield, a fat and slick capitalist, refused to appear, although he said he would, when he heard that the workers had stormed the hall.
Bitter protests were voiced at open meetings of the Goodrich and Firestone local meetings Sunday against similar policies in these two companies’ various plants. Speaker after speaker aroused the workers against the wage-slashing, hour-lengthening drive of the companies which had been predicted in a recent issue of the New Militant as a warning to the workers.
 
Prepare Drive
Officials of the United Rubber Workers of America, who arrived home today from their battle for industrial unionism at the A.F. of L. convention, immediately laid plans to organize the angry workers into the unions so effective collective action could he taken against the ruthless companies.
The “upper-house” of the Goodyear “industrial assembly” as the company calls its tool, is expected to meet Tuesday morning with the “lower-house” to act on the resolution of the lower house which demands continuation of the six-hour day.
Spurred by the shouts of the workers, the lower house of Goodyear’s pet project, voted to hold a referendum in the factories on the six-hour day but Litchfield coldly told the public in an interview that the company would not countenance any such move.
Probably the company union will be brought into line by threats from the officials. Nevertheless the damage has been done, for the veil of paternalism carefully fostered by Goodyear has been torn from the eyes of muddled workers because the hard-boiled, slave-driving vice-president, Clifford Slusser, contemptuously vetoed the resolution favoring the continuation of a six-hour day. This is what caused the revolt, and the lower house immediately over-rode him by a unanimous vote!
The impotence of the company union to aid the workers in any real issue stood out nakedly and smashed through all the propaganda for it during the past twenty years.
 
Revolt Spreads Rapidly
Even if the company should suddenly decide to accede temporarily to the company union demands, it will mean little, for the rubber workers’ union has already explained to hundreds of workers the exact meaning of the move – an attempt to fool the workers into staying out of their only real hope, the rubber workers’ union!
Despite the astounding proportions of the protest which has swept through the shops of Akron like a prairie fire fanned by a gale, the rubber barons have flung another challenge to the workers. They have announced that by January the eight-hour day will be here to stay!
An indication of the restlessness of the rubber workers under this continual exploitation is the rejoining of over 100 men in the Goodyear local union. The bona-fide unionists are agitating through the factories, taking full advantage of the break in the company union and the company officials’ consternation.
We previously pointed out how the lash of competition and the battle of Wall Street interests for control of the rubber industry was the reason the rubber barons were cutting wages and lengthening hours.
 
War Situation Involved
Another factor has arisen which the rubber barons are not overlooking as an excuse to lower the poor standard of living of the workers. The precarious world situation with its dangers to world commerce is causing a rise in the price of crude rubber; ninety percent of the rubber comes from the East Indies and India and there is possibility that the Suez Canal might be closed any day to shipping. This means higher freight rates for rubber across the American continent and increased difficulties in shipping.
These events in the rubber industry again show how the basic contradictions of the capitalist system cause the bosses to try to beat down wages and exploit labor more than ever before – a fall in the rate of profit drives them into a frenzy to preserve themselves.
They also indicate that the workers are becoming more resentful under the lash of these cruel masters and that this antagonism is gradually culminating into an explosive force whose power it is difficult to predict. It must be borne in mind however, that Akron has been the scene of more than one large spontaneous strike.
 



AKRON, Ohio, Oct, 8. – A titanic-struggle by Wall Street interests for monopoly control of the rubber industry began openly this week, thus confronting the newly-formed United Rubber Workers of America with the severest challenge to protect the workers that the unions ever faced.
For the price of this war between the capitalists will be thrown on the workers through wage cuts unless the unions can muster sufficient strength to stop this move.
The battle which will take the main form of ruthless tire price slashes to drive other competitors into bankruptcy already began with a huge reduction by Goodyear in various sections of the country.
Rockefeller and General Motors interests have virtual control of Firestone (the Firestone family is no longer boss of its factories) through a huge loan they gave recently to the company and they intend to gain complete control of the industry, it was learned authoritatively.
Goodrich has been in the hands of J.P. Morgan subsidiaries for quite some time while Goodyear, closely connected with Sears and Roebuck, belongs to Dillon and Reed, New York financiers.
No sooner did reports of General Motors entry into Firestone reach Akron than Goodyear, foreseeing the plan behind that move, slashed prices to attempt to drive Firestone from business.
 
Wage Cuts Threatened
Firestone tried a wage cut in an important department but threat of a spontaneous strike stopped this quickly. The company was laying the foundation for tire price reductions in that move.
So the grim shadow of long hours of work, poorer wages, and lay-offs hangs over the workers as it did in the late ’20’s when the companies fought their first big battle.
These revelations explain the questions many workers have been asking themselves as they saw wage reductions, the return of the 8-hour day, and lay-offs creep silently into the factories. The companies were simply laying the ground-work for their fight!
How can the unions meet this challenge? What must be done to bring the thousands of exploited back into the unions so that they can successfully defeat these company plans which mean added misery and starvation to the rubber workers?
The house-to-house canvas for members Is not enough for the organizational drive.
 
Program of Struggle
Around a platform that meets the workers’ desires and needs can they be rallied. This must include: (1) No wage reductions; (2) Continuation of the six-hour day and abolishment of the eight-hour day where it has been introduced; (3) Seniority rights in lay-offs and no discrimination against union members.
Mass meetings with the international officers as speakers should be held explaining what is happening and pointing out that the only bulwark against the capitalist offensive are the unions.
Insufficient stress has been placed on the fact that the rubber worker unions have won complete independence from the A.F. of L. bureaucracy and that now the workers can build an international of their own desire – one with a progressive policy that meets the changing conditions In the rubber industry.
Ample proof that the rubber workers will rally around such a program was given recently at Firestone where a threatened wage cut, brought complete solidarity in the department and forced the bosses to retreat!
 
Test of Leadership
This is the first major test of the new leadership of the U.R.W.A. Although the unfolding events in the rubber industry are filled with dangerous situations and can possibly bring further defeat for the workers, the key to success lies in this very danger.
For if the leaders can confront this situation calmly, armed with the correct policy and platform, they have created for themselves and the union a formula which, placed into action, can only result in bringing the rubber workers back into the union by the thousands.
As always, the Workers Party will do its utmost to achieve this aim – build the unions and strengthen the working class against the ravages of capitalism. This will show which leaders are giving the rubber workers the correct ideas and bringing results. Every officer of both the international itself and of the local unions should welcome this opportunity to display their abilities and their fundamental Interest in the workers, as we do.
It is in the field of battle that generals and the army itself are tested. This applies perfectly to the rubber workers’ union today because of the crisis.
 



LOS ANGELES – Although the strike was ended almost a week ago, the North American Aviation plant still resembles a Gestapo concentration camp.
For the U.S. Army has over 3,000 men at the plant, bayonets gleaming in the sun, the dull thud of the military boot and march resounding through the plant, and Col. Brandshaw in full control of hiring and firing.
The purpose of this crude display of military strength and brutality is two-fold:

The army hopes to break the dauntless spirit of the union militants before it leaves this area.
 
The army is aiding Richard T. Frankensteen, CIO aircraft division director and sell-out artist, in purging the union of its militant leaders.
 

Army Role Exposed
The only real effect of the Army’s presence here is to expose its strikebreaking role to the entire American labor movement. Its effect on the ex-strikers is just the opposite of that intended: the men have been sorer than ever before because of the dictatorial rules and injustices practiced by the army officers.
After the strikers voted to return to work in a wise strategic retreat, and carry on their fight within the plant since they were deserted by the CIO top officials, the army officers immediately broke the promise made by President Roosevelt that there would not be any discrimination.
At bayonet points, each of the union negotiating committee members who had been arbitrarily suspended by Frankensteen were taken from their jobs and to the police station for endless questioning about “communism.”
Colonel Brandshaw simply declared that “these men were not allowed to return because their faith was inimical to the government.”
No proof. No trial. No hearing.
Just a Hitler-like order carried out against the vehement protest of the North American workers who were held back by bayonets.
The men have filed charges with the National Labor Relations Board and expect other action as soon as the army leaves the plant.
Meanwhile union militants at Vultee Aircraft, at Chrysler, Willys-Overland Hiid other plants were summarily discharged in a co-ordinated plan between Frankensteen and the employers in this area to “purge the union of reds.”
 
Hillman Sends “Reserves”
Frankensteen’s blundering tactics have antagonized so many unionists in this area that Sidney Hillman, arch-red baiter of the CIO, is sending a crew of “experts” to help him out. Among them are Frank Daniels, alleged socialist of the Textile Workers, and Leon Kryzcki, social-democratic bureaucrat from the Amalgamated Clothing Workers, a Hillman hatchet-man from way back.
Thus far, Frankensteen’s attempts to build up an opposition within the North American union against its own duly elected leaders has not met with success. Only a few company rats are backing him.
The struggle within the union caused by Frankenstein’s “rule or ruin” policy – which he learned from his previous association with the Stalinists – is a smoke-acreen to keep the workers from thinking about the wage increases they want and need. The duly-elected leadership of the union is trying hard to concentrate on the main issue: get the signed contract with the “75-10” provision. But Frankensteen is deliberately shifting the issues and trying to split the union by setting up a fake negotiating committee which will sign a less agreeable contract. He has taken over the headquarters, while the regular union officials have another office, at CIO headquarters.
The entire question of removing Frankensteen and repudiating his strike-breaking policies will not be settled until the CIO auto workers convention in August in Buffalo.
The obvious strike-breaking of the army brought a reprimand from Philip Murray, president of the CIO, who sent a letter to all CIO unions to mobilize against the union-busting legislation before Congress and the use of troops to force compulsory arbitration.
Murray’s letter was a blow at Frankensteen, since Frankensteen had nothing but highest praise for the Army and its brass hats.
The position of Murray was adopted by the Los Angeles Industrial Union Council last Friday night at a densely filled meeting, which was expected to bring to an open head the clash between the “purgers” and the union militants of all shades and kind.
Phillip Connelly, executive secretary of the council, made a report on his activities in supporting the strike, as unanimously instructed by the previous meeting of the council. Debate on his report would have brought out the two main lines of capitulation or struggle against the Roosevelt union-busting campaign.
Fearing to take a clear stand on the matter. Connelly, backed by Wyndham Mortimer and L.U. Michner, UAW leaders who directed the strike, introduced a substitute motion to endorse Murray’s letter, and thus the whole debate was avoided.
The Murray letter, incidentally, contained some sharp and absolutely false statements about “subversive” groups within the CIO.
The strategy of the unionists slated for the widely-publicized Hillman purge apparently is going to be a defense around the slogan of “unity in this hour of crisis,” etc.
While the CIO continued its turbulent life and activities here, the AFL machinists signed a sell-out contract at Consolidated Aircraft covering 14,000 workers at San Diego. Wage provisions are a 55 cent minimum after three months service – 2½ cents less than that obtained by the CIO at Vultee.
Behind this entire story of the struggles within the union movement and the role of the army, etc., lies one basic fact: the 75,000 aircraft workers want higher wages and are determined to get them. All these moves are directed by Roosevelt or Frankensteen or the army to help the companies stop this demand.
We should add that the army’s presence here is supposed to terrorize not only the North American workers but all aircraft workers. “This is what you’ll get if you ask for wage increases,” is the unspoken speech of the army officials for Roosevelt.
But to no avail. The squeeze of the cost of living and lousy conditions and wages is a more powerful force than the army in determining the future of the struggle.
 
Bosses Run Plant
Since so many newspapers speak about the army control of the plant, perhaps it’s worth reminding our readers that this is pure bunk.
The company officials are in full control of production, their profits haven’t stopped one second, they are living in paradise right now, since that terrible thing called the union isn’t bothering them at present with negotiations.
The company didn’t have the nerve to fire the union committee. It was scared of the union’s strength. The army graciously performed this finky job for the company.
The army didn’t seize the plant. It smashed the picket lines and opened the plant so that company officials could again run production and make profit from labor.
The army had only one role here: strike-breaking which made the old National Guard activities look like the work of little angels.
 



LOS ANGELES – “75–10 or strike!” this battle cry rallied 11,000 workers of the North American Aviation C0. this week as they prepared to struggle for a 75 cent hourly minimum and a general 10 cent blanket raise which the company refused to concede in negotiations.
Hot on the heels of winning a National Labor Relations Board election over the AFL, the CIO Autoworkers Union presented a contract for North American to sign. Besides recognition of the union, the wage demands constituted the major points of the contract around which the fight is centering.
Sentiment among the workers for the CIO increased rapidly when they saw a struggle coming and hundreds upon hundreds of them immediately joined the CIO so that a strike vote polled 5,829 for a strike and only 210 against!
Many of the employees were not eligible to vole yet, since they were just hired, but the overwhelming sentiment for strike was clearly expressed in the balloting. When the NLRB election took place 7,000 men were eligible to vote. The company has hired almost 4,000 more men since then.
Cause of the insistence on a wage increase is obvious. Not only is the cost of living shooting skyward here, fabulous profits that the wage increases won’t even squeeze the company hard.
Richard T. Frankensteen, UAW director of the aviation organization, pointed out that in 1939 North American made $7,600,000 profit, which is 96 per cent of the total capital investment of the company.
In 1940 it made $7,800,000. In other words, in two years it got back all the money put into building the company, and it has the plants free and it is making huge profits from more government orders. It’s better than a gold mine!
So the CIO chose this company as a “must” on its list in the fight to establish a minimum of 75 cents an hour in aircraft.
Victory at North American means further impetus to the CIO aircraft drive at Douglas and other plants and should establish the CIO over the AFL in the industry.
These thoughts were in the minds of the union negotiation committee which was called to Washington on Monday by the Roosevelt Mediation Board. The board will try to sell them a phony compromise.
Back here the ranks are watching closely. “75–10 or strike” is their slogan. They are ready to fight for their rights.
 



LOS ANGELES, June 10 – The strike at the North American Aviation Co. ended today as strikers, voted to return to work in the plant, which is now under command of the U.S. Army. The union leaders were trying, as this story is written, to make an agreement for the return of men in a body. Army officials in charge of the plant refused, however, to make any commitments. Though the men voted to return, they did so in the spirit that victory was yet to come – they were not a disorganized and demoralized group. They had waged a magnificent fight despite treachery and bayonet charge. The issue of 75–10 remains. The men will yet win their demands.
*
LOS ANGELES – Courageous North American Aviation Co. strikers on Monday took their place of honor with Flint auto workers, Bethlehem steel workers and other militants who built the CIO into a powerful industrial union movement.
It took nearly 3,000 federal troops to force the picket lines of over 6.000 strikers and thousands of sympathizers away from the plant gates, after three police charges against the workers were stopped cold.
The baptism of fire the thousands of young workers received in the tussle with the strike-breaking cops turned them into militant, union conscious fighters ready for the big struggle ahead.
And the tear gas fumes, the bayonets and the army uniforms only served to heighten the determination of the strikers on Monday.
Cold steel, backed by machine guns, was used by the U.S. Army in what it admits is an open strikebreaking move under Roosevelt’s direct orders.
The use of federal troops – unprecedented in the last decade – against strikers became a national issue since labor unionists everywhere saw it as the beginning of a union-smashing campaign by Roosevelt.
Before the troops marched into the scene, over 500 cops and special deputies tried to break the picket line. But the mass chain picketing proved too strong for them.
Early dawn today found thousands of peppy strikers and sympathizers marching at the gates, singing songs and shouting, “Hold That Line!”
Two minor skirmishes were begun by police to test the mettle of the strikers. The atmosphere was still cheerful and friendly.
Suddenly the cops at the main gate began crowding through the chain picket line. It held solidly. So tear gas was thrown by the panicky police, who obviously were plenty impressed by the size and spirit of the picket line.
After a momentary break in the line, the pickets reformed, meanwhile sending the cops running into the plant like scared rabbits, with the tear gas shell they had thrown following right after them.
About 30 unionists suffered minor injuries and everyone shed tears from the gas, which had exactly the opposite effect intended: It stiffened the resistance tremendously. A second major attempt was made shortly thereafter when Mayor Bowron, elected by labor, of course, started to walk through the chain picket line surrounded by a hundred cops and with some scabs. The army had arrived and was watching this tussle.
A group of militants jumped into the breach made open and soon a powerful surge of the entire picket line forced the cops to quit ... and were they glad when they saw the federal troops come in!
CIO leaders pointed out to the strikers that the picket lines would be sent back by the army but that they would be maintained right outside the bayonets, and that soldiers can’t build airplanes. To most of the strikers it was unbelievable that the army would openly bust the strike if it could. But the hard, grim orders and the cold steel pressing back the lines soon convinced many strikers why the army was here.
After three hours of this Hitler-like demonstration against the strikers, about 500 weak-sisters out of the 9,000 production, workers entered the plant.
Only continued strike-breaking maneuvers by the top CIO leaders, in violation of the entire spirit and tradition of the CIO movement, can stab the men in the back.
The United Automobile Workers locals throughout the country especially have the job of rallying quickly behind the strikers. The UAW record of militant struggle and victory has a dark stain in Richard T. Frankensteen’s treachery which must be wiped off the banner of this powerful industrial union organization.
 



LOS ANGELES – West Coast labor is putting up a magnificent fight on every front against the attempts of the Roosevelt war machine to roller over the rights and conditions earned through many years of struggle here.

12,000 timber workers rejected an arbitrary order of Roosevelt’s mediation board to give up their fight for a decent contract in the Washington lumber area, despite the highest pressure possible on the union leaders and the strikers.
 
The AFL and CIO machinists in San Francisco are still holding picket lines solid and even the capitalist press admits that over 14,000 other workers are respecting the picket lines.
 
Over 11,000 North American Aircraft workers in Los Angeles told their negotiating committee to go back to Washington and stick to the basic demands of 75 cents an hour minimum and a ten cent general raise at Mediation Board hearings.

The strike call for Tuesday was postponed since it was agreed to make any concessions retroactive to May 1.
 
More than 3,000 CIO warehousemen in San Francisco were ready to hit the pavement to protect the rights of women workers and get them equal pay with men on the same jobs. (The employers agreed to a ten cent raise for men but discriminated against the nearly 1,000 women employed.)
 

Unions on Firm Ground
In each of these major struggles – there are many others too – the union has a clear cut case which can’t be answered.
The lumber companies, the aircraft corporations, the shipyards and the warehouses are making a big pile of dough. This is common public knowledge and the companies have not dared try deny these facts.
The workers are very dissatisfied with present wage scales since the rapidly mounting cost of living is squeezing them dry. so they demand what justly belongs to them.
Ordinarily, victory would be a cinch.
But now the employers have a powerful open ally in the Roosevelt regime which joins the bosses in yelling “national defense” and hiding all direct attacks on labor under this guise.
Today Roosevelt declared all war industries to be so in name. The purpose of this is to scare labor out of fighting for its just demands. The pattern of tricks runs like this:

An employer doesn’t produce government orders unless he gets at least 10 or 12 per cent clear profit. (The shipyard companies refused to build ships last year unless their rate of 8 per cent was boosted to 10 and 12 per cent. On British orders, by the way, the rate of profit is much higher.) This is the regular legal procedure which guarantees the bosses they’ll make profit out of this war.
 
When the unions ask for a cut of this gravy, they are rejected. The employers tell the negotiating committees that they can’t lower their rate of profit. Since the unions know this is baloney they prepare to strike to achieve their aims.
 
Usually, the union would call a strike immediately, but now a combined propaganda campaign forces them to proceed more cautiously. Workers are told that to strike is to delay or sabotage “national defense.” So the men hesitate until they see that falling for this gag means that the employers have their own way, chisel on wages and conditions, and ride high, wide and handsome like in the open shop days.
 
Red scares and war hysteria are pumped into the minds of the people to make it more difficult for them to see the issues clearly: the bosses are getting theirs, and the men are getting hooked. And the men are fighting against this injustice.

The press of economic insecurity is forcing the workers to battle despite all the torrent of abuse and lies hurled at them. And they are becoming increasingly bitter about the raw deal of the Roosevelt regime.
So the strikers are remaining solid.
Fancy maneuvers, calls to Washington, phony peace announcements, delays, etc., are used to weaken or break these strikes. In each case the unionists are standing firm because they haven’t got what they must have in order to live.
The propaganda about “national defense” isn’t catching much hold. That is why the unions and the Roosevelt regime are in a head-on collision.
Showdowns in lumber, the shipyards and aircraft are unavoidable this week.
The unionists are learning through painful experience that they have no friends except themselves. That what they get depends on their own strength.
 
Terrific Pressure
The pressure on union leaders is simply terrific. FBI men shadow them continuously. Now the trick is to call them to Washington where all sorts of heat is put on them by various government officials. Meanwhile on the picket lines rumors and lies are spread to divide the men.
The resistance of the strikers up and down the coast to these kinds of tactics is a good demonstration of the remarkable power of the union.
Over the week end, all the aircraft plants, the shipyards and other major industrial points were placed under military surveillance, again primarily as a means of intimidating the workers from fighting against attempts to enslave them.
Pursuit planes fly overhead, anti-aircraft and machine guns have been mounted, “unlimited emergency” has been proclaimed, all to terrorize labor.
But thus far labor stands solid. Roosevelt strike-breaking hasn’t succeeded yet. This is the big week.
 



Ninety-nine per cent of the draftees are against the United States going to war against the Axis powers immediately.
Seventy-six per cent of the draftees are against fighting overseas at any time!
These statistics, along with many others, were released from Camp-Callan, near San Diego, by the Army, which stated that they were gathered by a former associate of Dr. George Gallup of Gallup poll notoriety, and were said to represent what the entire army would think like, on the basis of sampling.
Remembering that only certain kinds of questions were asked, and that the soldiers are somewhat cautious of expressing their views, even in private, the survey is a remarkable admission of the failure of the Roosevelt regime to fool the people about its “fighting a war for democracy,” etc., bunk.
Note the trick nature of the questions asked, too:
“As a whole, do you feel that, your life in the army is better, worse or about the same as you had pictured it before you were drafted?”
In reply, the men said:



Better


..........


28%




Worse


..........


23%




About the same


..........


49%



It you reread the question it is not what you think at first. It does not ask honestly: do you think your army life is better or worse than what you had? The question adds a phrase about “as you pictured it.’’
Now most draftees had a very bad picture before they entered the army. They expected the worst, by and large. Only 28 per cent of them found it was not as bad as they imagined it, 23 per cent found it was worse than they thought and 49 per cent found just what they expected.
Hardly a satisfied army!
On the matter of food, the draftees rated it, according to this survey:



Good


..........


48%




Fair


..........


33%




Poor


..........


19%



About their clothes they said:



Satisfactory


..........


47%




Don’t fit


..........


39%




Unsatisfactory


..........


14%



How about army discipline?



Too lenient


..........


16%




Too strict


..........


  6%




Inconsistent


..........


10%




About as it should be


..........


68%



What sacrifices did the soldiers consider the greatest when they entered army life?



Separation from friends and family


43%




Parting with freedom of civilian life


26%




Loss of income, business or job


31%



To view these statistics objectively one can come to only one important conclusion: there is little real enthusiasm for the military life imposed on a big section of the population.
 
Complaints Are Deep and Widespread
Naturally, in any army, no matter how democratically called into being, say a people’s army, there would be some beefing. But the dissatisfaction existing in the present conscript army is far deeper and more decisive than just the ordinary complaints. First the total complaints and the proportion are very high.
But the clue to the lethargy and disgust in the army comes from analyzing the results of the questions of a political nature: Why and what? What political aims should it have and uphold? Seventy-five per cent of the draftees are opposed to convoys! Representative of their views is the following statement:
“Naval aid to Britain is going one step too far. Too much meddling in Europe’s affairs got us into the last war and where did it get us?”
Then there were four questions asked on foreign policy:
Which of the following four statements do you most agree with:
1. The United States should go to war with the Axis immediately.



For


..........


  1%



2. The United States should continue its policy of all out economic aid to Britain and expand America’s military and naval forces to fight the Axis powers overseas if the Axis powers are not defeated by Britain.”



For


..........


23%



3. The United States should guard the entire western hemisphere but should send no military aid outside this area.



For


..........


39%



4. The United States should be strictly neutral and prepare to defend only our own territory and possessions.



For


..........


37%




Against Roosevelt’s Policy
Now an ultra-leftist would interpret these answers to indicate that the conscripts agree “in principle” to the Roosevelt “defense” program.
But we do not see the question abstractly, or formally. What we see is living and moving forces, going in opposite directions. And this is decisive to us.
For, obviously, the Roosevelt regime, as indicated in FDR’s latest speech, is heading for formal declaration of war, overseas campaigns, world domination, etc.
The conscripts, in a vast majority, are out of sympathy with this foreign policy. They instinctively are heading in the opposite direction. They want to slay home, where they feel “defense of democracy” begins.
In a word, it seems obvious to us that Roosevelt is going to drag unwilling armed forces (who, by the way, reflect the majority of the people’s views in this) into a conflict with whose aims they have no sympathy.
This factor, we believe, is the major cause of the present dissatisfaction in the United States Army.
If you combine this with the bitterness of the labor movement over the way it is being kicked around while employers get bloated on war profits, you see the signs of another France looming ahead.
For, despite all the ballyhoo about “national unity,” the facts speak otherwise. Class interests and antagonisms are getting sharper, not lesser, if you look under the superficial picture presented by the newspapers, magazines and radio.
 



Comrade Shachtman and the Political Committee changed erroneously the Workers Party line on the Russian question, thereby committing a tragic blunder in disorienting the party and the workers precisely at the time and wider the circumstances when our party’s position should and could have been clear, correct and effective in mobilizing the struggle against world imperialism.
Changes in party line are important when they either advance the struggle of the workers to a higher plane by new ideas, or bring a false orientation which derails the workers.
The Workers Party foresaw the possibility of a change in the World War of such an important character that the workers of the world would have to shift their strategy, to accomplish their main aim: destruction of world imperialism. The failure of the Political Committee to apply the strategy worked out by us in the past, since it is the correct strategy, constitutes the terrible mistake those comrades made.
When Will It Change? The whole present discussion of the Russian question becomes crystal clear, as do the points made above, by re-reading the Workers Party resolution printed in the March 1940 issue of The New International.
When would the character of this present World War change? Assume a dual form, so to speak?
“However, if the character of the war changes from one of inter-imperialist conflict, in which the Red Army acts as a pawn of one imperialist power and as an instrument of bureaucratic expansion, into a war determined by the capitalist imperialist politics of destruction of the Soviet state power and the reduction of Russia to a colony – that is, determined by the world antagonism of capitalist imperialism and Soviet nationalized economy -- our position would change correspondingly to the change in the character of the war.”
The character of the war changes when the destruction of Soviet state power and the reduction of Russia to a colony is directly involved. Then our party becomes defensist, so the resolution says.
Shachtman grants, to use his term, what is obvious to everyone who has read any newspaper or heard any radio report in the last two weeks: the destruction of Russia is directly and primarily involved.
 
What Kind of Defense?
Our party was committed in advance to defensism under the circumstance of Soviet Russia fighting primarily for its self-existence. The circumstance is present, clear and obvious to everyone.
But Shachtman now adds some words about the role of the Stalinist bureaucracy. Won’t it still play reactionary role?” the comrades ask, and isn’t this decisive?
“In such a war, the Stalinist bureaucracy, despite the fact that it continues to defend, in its own way. its power and revenue, would be conducting a progressive war,” the Workers Party resolution correctly pointed out.
In essence, I can place Shachtman’s warning about the role of Stalin and the bureaucracy only in the category of those ultra-left critics of the Marxist movement who objected to our support of China’s struggle for independence because Chiang Kai-shek was the “butcher” of the Chinese revolution.
The resolution continues. “The revolutionary working class would in this case adopt the position of the defense of the Soviet Union.”
Why? Even though nationalized property is involved, some comrades have asked.
“Our position would be dictated by which COINCIDE with the struggle to defend Soviet nationalized property from liquidation by ANY IMPERIALIST POWER or powers.”
Now Shachtman insists, if I understand his argument as printed in Labor Action, that he can be for defense only if all imperialist powers are against Soviet Russia, thereby missing the whole point, which is that what matters is that Soviet nationalized property be saved from liquidation, and not whether one or three powers try the liquidating.
How would we conduct the defense of the Soviet Union? This to answer the comrades who say you’ll be identified with the Stalinists in the eyes of the workers by being for defense, as though by itself that were a decisive argument.
“The defense of the Soviet Union would be conducted by us independently, without for a moment abandoning the political struggle against the counter-revolutionary bureaucracy.”
Re-read the entire Workers Party resolution on the Russian question. The comrades will see again what I point out here. Our party has a position on defensism in a mixed war such as exists today, that is down on black and white.
 
China and Russia
Let us hope that no comrade now proposes to revise the Marxian concept of mixed wars and our strategy as related thereto. It is succinctly stated in War and the Fourth International, another must on one’s reading list these days.
Since Shachtman points out that he is for the defense of China today against Japan as a representative of world imperialism, it is clear he doesn’t use the argument I’ve heard elsewhere that since Germany, England, America, etc., predominate on the world scene and they fight an imperialist war, therefore all related wars or struggles are secondary and don’t deserve support.
Just as Stalin’s military victory over Hitler would aid Britain, so would China’s successes against Japan weaken it in fighting American imperialism. But what is decisive in each case is that world imperialism gels a blow. Its unceasing attempts to find new markets to exploit, thereby prolonging its existence, are smashed down.
The revolutionary possibilities from Hitler’s defeat, or for that matter, Japan’s defeat in the Far East, as we at least always agreed on the Chinese question, make imperative the material support of the Soviet Union today, and also China.
If at a later stage in the war, Stalin’s armies go down to disastrous defeat, and he becomes a puppet of Anglo-American imperialism with decisive sections of the Soviet Union in Hitler’s hands, then the character of the war once again would change. Just as American influence over China can become so decisive that China functions solely as a puppet of American imperialism in its struggle against Japanese imperialism.
When that disastrous turn of the war takes place – and it is possible in both Soviet Russia’s role and China’s role – then the revolutionary movement will work out another strategy for defeating world imperialism. But for each day, the labor thereof.
 







In preparation for the coming convention of the Workers Party, the National Committee of the WP herewith opens the pre-convention discussion period. To the extent that space is available, Labor Action will publish discussion contributions on the various political problems confronting the party. ALL CONTRIBUTIONS MUST BE LIMITED TO 1,200 WORDS. The article we print below runs over the space allotment because it is the first presentation of a position counter to that taken by the Political Committee of the Workers Party.





Hitler’s Drang Nach Osten took the form of a blitzkrieg attack on the Soviet Union to carve out a rich colony supplying essential raw materials, in particular from the Ukraine, to his strained war economy. It came as a surprise in only one respect to the Marxist movement.
Stalin failed to capitulate to Hitler’s demand for the Ukraine and, for other concessions. Or more accurately, Stalin was forced to fight because the tremendous pressure of the Soviet masses made itself felt even through the bureaucracy and caused the change in Stalin’s orientation.
Two years ago Leon Trotsky warned of the possibility of Stalin capitulating to Hitler’s demand for the Ukrainian breadbasket and the Caucasian oil wells and therefore raised the slogan for an Independent Soviet Ukraine. When Stalin hitched his wagon to Hitler’s ascending star, when and if Hitler began to lose, i.e., suffer a major defeat, would Stalin switch sides and make an agreement with the British and American ruling classes.
Meanwhile Stalin assumed the contemptible role of jackal to Hitler’s marauding lion, grabbing a share of Poland, Finland, Bessarabia and the small Baltic countries.
 
An Unexpected Change
Hitler’s military and diplomatic successes in Europe and especially the Balkans brought fear and dread to the Kremlin, but also, in the eyes of the entire world, made Stalin a closer prisoner in the Axis chain from which escape was possible only by a London-Washington victory of such decisive proportions that Stalin would not fear the Nazi war machine. So the accepted theory went. Yet the Soviet Union today is fighting desperately for existence, against the panzer divisions, long before the full force of American imperialist intervention has been felt: Hitler is bête noire; the jackal fights not for spoils but for his own skin.
One must be candid: The present turn of the war is different than that considered probable or possible by the entire Marxist movement, not to speak of the rest of the world.
Trotsky foresaw, and predicted often, that sooner or later the Second Imperialist World War would turn into an onslaught of world imperialism against the Soviet Union with Hitler in the role of super-Wrangel. His supporters in the American movement even went so far as the headline in the Socialist Appeal which announced an undeclared four-power pact and war against the Soviet Union.
But that Hitler would attack the Soviet Union while the Battle of the Atlantic was raging, would attack the USSR while still fighting London-Washington, and that this would bring not a four-power pact against Russia but renewed British-American determination to defeat Hitler – a possible Washington-London-Moscow combination! This was entirely unexpected.
For, to re-emphasize, even such strong apologists and mouthpieces of Stalin as Walter Duranty in the New York Times only a few days before the attack began declared again that the world must expect capitulation because Stalin feared war above all things.
 
What Motivated Stalin?
What does this indicate? What does the war mean?
Stalin feared war because it would crack his shaky regime and bring closer the revolution at home, Trotsky pointed out time and again. Stalin feared something today greater than his fear of revolution tomorrow. It was the internal uprising today. inevitable if he pursued once more a Munich policy in relation to Hitler. This profoundly significant fact caused the drastic shift in Stalin’s policy. Garbled reports of the struggle of Red Army leaders against the capitulation to Hitler’s demands hint at what really happened. Three years ago this same army was unable to protect its leaders from the purge.
Stalin was forced by tremendous internal pressure to take the step he dreaded, to fight a war for the defense of the Soviet Union, in particular the Ukraine. And the primary role of the USSR in the Second World War NOW is self-defense, a struggle for sheer existence.
 
Stalin’s Weaknesses
How terrible the tragedy that in this crucial hour the Soviet Union will pay heavily for the crimes of mismanagement under Stalin’s regime: Its Red Army deprived of the possibility of leadership from its creator and revolutionary soul, Leon Trotsky, a victim of the GPU; its general staff and the brilliant Tukachevsky destroyed: its workers and peasants’ demoralized by the cruelty of the regime; its economy in grave crisis from the blundering Stalinist policies and the extermination of competent technicians an administrators in the purges: its once invincible Bolshevik party and leadership murdered and mummified.
Hitler didn’t suddenly become a madman when he decided to attack the Soviet Union, although the war with Britain was just reaching the decisive stage. Hitler knew precisely the exact weaknesses of the Soviet Union. His technical and military missions, the Gestapo, his friends in the Stalinist bureaucracy told him of the terrible results of Stalinism in Russia. Hitler envisions a blitzkrieg victory over the Soviet Union – another France, in his eyes – before American imperialism can throw its full military weight in the war and dominate the world. For the possibility of successful war against Anglo-American imperialism Hitler must reduce Russia into a super-India on whose shoulders would fall the intolerable burden of the imperialist war as a slave. And it is not excluded that Stalin might become a peculiar kind of Petain, or that he visualizes himself as reserved for that role in “unoccupied Russia.”
 
Which Way Victory?
Victory of Hitler over the Soviet Union means a prolongation of the Second Imperialist World War, and the attendant miseries to the peoples of the world. It would signify the destruction of the remaining vestiges of the October Revolution, the nationalized economy and the monopoly of foreign trade; it would wipe out the tradition of the Russian Revolution, already horribly deformed by Stalinism.
Victory of the Soviet Union can come only through the resurgence of the flaming spirit and morale which distinguished the Russia of Lenin and Trotsky, defending itself successfully on fifteen fronts over thousands of miles against all the world’s big powers. The Soviet people must utilize this war not only to drive the enslaver from Germany into oblivion, but to restore the country to the path of socialism.
Hitler’s defeat would bring a revolutionary crisis in Germany; it would inspire and arouse all the oppressed small nations and peoples in Europe. It would smash the myth of the invincibility of fascism.
These considerations are not one whit less valid for those comrades who, disagreeing with the present position of the Workers Party that Russia is a bureaucratically degenerated workers state, state with Comrade Shachtman that the class character of the USSR is “bureaucratic collectivism.”
“As in the case of a colonial or semi-colonial country or a small nation, we defend the Soviet Union against imperialism when it is fighting a progressive war, one that corresponds with that of the international socialist revolution,” he wrote in the December 1940 New International, and he gave an example which is exactly the case today, in demonstrating when he would defend the USSR.
“Should the character of the present war change from that of a struggle between the imperialist camps into a struggle of imperialists to crush the Soviet Union, the interests of the world revolution would demand the defense of the Soviet Union by the international proletariat. The aim of imperialism in that case, whether it were represented in the war by ONE OR MANY POWERS (our emphasis – J.W.) would be to solve the crisis of world capitalism at the cost of reducing the Soviet Union to one or more colonial possessions or spheres of interest.”
“Such a transformation of the Soviet Union as triumphant imperialism would undertake would have a vast and durable reactionary effect upon world social development, give capitalism and reaction a new lease on life, retard enormously the revolutionary movement and postpone for we don’t know how long the introduction of world socialist society. From that viewpoint and under these conditions, the defense of the Soviet Union, even under Stalinism, is both possible and necessary,” Shachtman declared. Correct, for those conditions prevail today.
 
Dual Character
Winston Churchill, arch-foe of Lenin’s Russia, shed a crocodile tear over the plight of the Soviet people under the lash of the Swastika. He called for aid to Russia as an ally of British imperialism. Britain undoubtedly received a badly needed breathing spell from Hitler’s diversion in the East. Most of the defenders of democratic imperialism who yesterday denounced Stalin not for his crimes against the workers but for his refusal to help them bolster the dying British Empire, France and the United States, are ready to clasp him to their bosoms again, as befitting political prostitutes. If a conjunctural relationship of forces brings a military alliance between these three powers against Hitler we do not in advance condemn Russia’s signature there. But the Soviet people must see to it that the pact does not become another “Stalin-Hitler” alliance, dividing small nations, binding the world proletariat to the imperialist war aims of the other belligerents.
The difference between the Stalin-Hitler pact and a Washington-London-Moscow pact now is not that one was with a fascist nation and the other with democratic imperialism. No. Marxists have always realized that under certain circumstances temporary military alliances by a workers’ state or a semi-colonial country might be necessary. What is decisive in these alliances is the specific content. That under no circumstances must the struggle for world revolution be signed away. The Fourth International criticized the Franco-Soviet pact not because it was an agreement with a capitalist nation but because Stalin tied the Communist Party of France to the coattails of the French bourgeoisie. It replaced class struggle with class collaboration and the Communist Party voted for the military budget. Stalin’s pact with Hitler was reactionary basically for the same reason. And Stalin dragged Russia into a treacherous adventure so the bureaucracy could satisfy its lust for power, revenue and prestige. His plunge into Finland alienated the world proletariat, his enslavement of a section of Poland likewise was reactionary. All these things were part of the Stalin-Hitler pact. Stalin’s blunders and crimes weakened the Soviet Union, not defended it. Now Stalin is forced to defend the Soviet Union. He finds himself “reluctantly and unwillingly” fighting Hitler, as one radio commentator put it exactly. In these concrete circumstances, a military pact with London-Washington would be primarily a defensive one from the point of view of the interests of the Soviet Union.
Neither Roosevelt nor Churchill need to nor will they offer anything to Stalin except perhaps to assist him long enough to save his skin temporarily while they prepare to settle with German imperialism. Actually the mutual exhaustion of Germany and Russia in this war is the hope of the Anglo-American rulers. But their fear of a quick collapse of Stalin’s regime apparently is inducing them to some aid now. Thus, any agreement between London-Washington and Moscow now will have a different content and significance now than did the Stalin-Hitler pact in 1939.
And the war assumes a dual character now. The aims of Britain, Germany, America and their respective allies are purely imperialistic. Each of these nations seeks world domination of the markets, the sources of raw materials, etc. The Soviet Union has been forced into the Washington-London camp purely for defensive reasons. This kind of war was foreseen as possible by the old thesis of the Fourth International on war and the strategy and tactics flowing from it are known to students of the movement.
 
Our War Position
No trust in the “democracies” to aid in the defense of the Soviet Union. It is not excluded by a long shot that a turn in the fortunes of war would bring a deal with Hitler by Britain and America. Russia today must not be permitted to become another Spain.
It goes without saying that we are as unalterably opposed to American participation in this war today as ever. Only scoundrels and traitors in the labor movement will call for America’s declaration of war against Germany, even if given under the false excuse that this will aid the Soviet Union. America’s participation in this war is motivated by only one urge – expansion of American imperialism, its world domination. To bind the American workers to this reactionary aim is to betray their best interests. The main task of the American workers consists of continuing the class struggle at home. Trotsky expressed the whole strategy very well in the February 1940 issue of The New International.
“The Fourth International has established firmly that in all imperialist countries, independent of the fact as to whether they are in alliance with the USSR or in a camp hostile to it, the proletarian parties during the war must develop the class struggle with the purpose of seizing power.”
The world proletariat through independent action helped save the Soviet Union in the crucial years from 1917–21, while the big powers, recently concluding a four year war for world mastery, united then to destroy the Soviet Union. This lesson must not be forgotten.
So today the Soviet people have only one ally. It is the oppressed people of the world; industrial workers, sharecroppers, colonial peoples, white, brown, black and yellow. They must come to the rescue again by giving material aid to the Soviet Union, independently of their ruling governments.
 
Must Overthrow Stalin
The Stalin regime proved itself bankrupt in time of peace. Its international record is one of tragic blunders and defeats and treachery. Stalin can hardly expect the slightest bit of confidence or political support from the world proletariat even while it aids the Soviet Union materially. While the Soviet Army is battling desperately to drive Hitler from Russia, the Russian workers and peasants should not forget – they must carry on to win the war – another task. The overthrow of the Stalin regime, this stinky and deadly albatross around their necks. Transform the present Red Army into, the invincible legions of Trotsky’s Red Guards. Create Soviets to direct the struggle as in the days of old. This must be the strategic goal of the Soviet fighters defending valiantly the country from Hitler. Out of their rich historical experience and knowledge, the Russian workers will know how to carry out the tremendous tasks placed on their shoulders by history.
Nor should the many crimes of Stalin and the bureaucracy blind or prejudice either the Russian workers or the world proletariat to the vital need lot being Soviet defensists today against the onslaught of Hitler. To settle accounts with Stalin is a job the proletariat must reserve for itself. A crushed Russia today means not merely the defeat of Stalin but the extermination of all that is left of the October Revolution, the further enslavement of the Soviet people, a setback for the world revolution.
The new twists and turns of the Stalinist parties throughout the world already evident today should be treated with exactly what they deserve, the contempt and repudiation of the world proletariat. In America and England the Stalinists will rush back into respectable society and repeat all the tragic blunders of the old Peoples Front days.
Stalin and his lackeys throughout the world will try to fight fascism now as they “fought” it in Spain. They still fear the call for revolutionary struggle against fascism. It was this fear that betrayed the Spanish workers and brought Franco to victory. The Soviet people and the world proletariat can be mobilized in unconquerable struggle; against fascism only under the revolutionary banners and ideas of Lenin and Trotsky. Rather than depend on this force, Stalin in Spain banked on England and America, and the Spanish Revolution was crushed, with the GPU hounding and murdering the revolutionists who stood firmly for a program of victory. This tragic mistake must not be repeated now.
While giving full material support to the Soviet Union in the war against Hitlerism now, the revolutionary movement must not renounce one single line of its devastating political criticism of Stalinism. Building the parties of the Fourth International to lead the proletariat in triumph against world imperialism assures the best and only defense of the workers of the world and the Soviet Union.
June 23, 1941
 



The Ku Klux Klan, which considers the CIO as a menace to America, has embarked on an ambitious program of destroying the CIO from within, by first capturing as many unions as possible.
In Detroit, heart of the Auto Workers Union, the Ku Klux Klan openly announced its intention this week of recruiting 5,000 more members among the UAWA locals.
They are openly recruiting, they are openly organizing classes in parliamentary procedure so their fractions can operate more efficiently, they are studying union organization to become experts in breaking up unions and, above all, they are organizing goon squads and vigilante groups to terrorize opponent elements.
Six Ku Klux Klan members in Georgia are under felony sentences for flogging CIO mill workers in Atlanta three years ago. It is the KKK which leads every gang of vigilantes who slug, tar and feather CIO organizers trying to bring unionism to the South. Every CIO unionist knows that down South the toughest opponent, the real strong-arm of the open shop bosses, is the KKK.
When the CIO began to sweep the country in 1936, the KICK tried its terroristic tactics to stop industrial unionism. They burned crosses on the hills near Akron’s rubber plants, for example, in an effort to intimidate the rubber workers, who very promptly went on a sit-down strike and chased after the hooded vigilantes, who fled.
In the General Motors strike, the KKK elements along with the Black Legion, acted as a strike-breaking agency, trying to whip up sentiment against the CIO.
In Anderson, Ind., the KKK headed a mob of three hundred which tried to lynch two union organizers, after having already run some union men out of town.
These open acts, and many others like them, alienated all support the KKK had among the thousands of workers in the Midwest mass production industries before the CIO came along. It is a fact, for example, that once upon a time 90 per cent of Akron’s rubber workers were members pf the KKK. And Toledo and Detroit were two other strongholds of the Klan in the North. Now the KKK is reviving in these areas. That is what is so extremely significant and important to the labor movement. That the KKK can hold open recruiting drives, in Detroit must come as a shock to every union militant associated with the CIO.
The KKK program in the union consists first and foremost of creating bitter and union-busting feelings by its venomous attacks on the “Catholics, Jews, Communists, Negroes and Foreigners.” It seeks to divide the workers along religious and racial lines. It preaches Jim-Crowism within the union movement.
What is involved is not only that the KKK is a prototype of a fascist force, or that its program is reactionary.
The specific program that KKK members advocate in the CIO unions is a direct violation not only of the whole spirit and tradition of the CIO movement, but of the laws of the CIO stated in the CIO national constitution, which say that the CIO basic principle, is social, economical and political equality.
The CIO takes in all workers, by its constitution, irrespective of their race, creed or color. The KKK fights openly, against this whole idea, and violates every single basic principle of the CIO.
The CIO can no more tolerate the KKK or it members within the CIO unions than it can tolerate stool-pigeons and other direct agents of the bosses.
The question before the CIO is not one of freedom of speech for a working class political opponent, that is, an individual who starts from the same pro-labor basis but disagrees on program for carrying it out.
The KKK openly stands anti-labor. It acts against labor. It is the spearhead of all the foul “forces “of reaction. It is the natural basis for a full-blown fascist movement.
Inclusion of its members within organized labor is like permitting a cancer germ to be placed in a healthy body. Death is the only result.
In self-preservation, the CIO must immediately drive the KKK out of its ranks.
Unless the CIO does this nationally, Phillip Murray, CIO president, will find, for example, a group of men carrying CIO cards who oppose him merely because he is of Catholic faith (whereas freedom of religion is a cardinal point among the rights defended by the CIO). Other union officials and members will be opposed merely because they are of Jewish faith. Militants because, they will be, branded “Communists.” Negro unionists will be subjected to “lynch-law” terrorism.
“Poison the atmosphere of the CIO by creating and fomenting racial and religious prejudices.” Those are the instructions of the Imperial Wizard of the KKK to his blind followers in the CIO.
“Hurl the cry of Nigger-lover at any CIO unionist who wants the South organized,” the Imperial Wizard adds. This way perhaps the Negro and white workers can be further divided. Perhaps the Southern White worker can be made a victim of the prejudices inculcated in him since birth and the CIO kept from organizing the South to benefit all workers, Negro, white or any other race.
Only the bosses benefit from the KKK program.
Drive the KKK put of the CIO! Cut this cancer out of the unions!
 



The conference of labor and industry called by President Roosevelt this week in Washington meets in an atmosphere surcharged with antagonisms arising from the conflicting interests of the participating forces.
Roosevelt seeks to obtain by voluntary agreement a “truce” between the labor movement of the employers of America, which, in effect, will hogtie the union movement completely to the war machine.
The National Association of Manufacturers denounced even the calling of a conference between union representatives and themselves or their representatives, since they desire to see the Smith slave labor act passed and become a law.
The NAM seeks cleverly to bludgeon the labor movement into surrender by saying in so many words: “Don’t antagonize us by any serious proposals or we’ll walk out; of the conference.”
 
AFL Blind Sheep
The AFL representatives, headed by William Green, will participate in the conference as blind sheep, having adopted by formal vote of the AFL executive board a peace at any price policy, which appeasement is certainly welcomed by the NAM and by Roosevelt.
The CIO delegation, headed by Phillip Murray, has as its major aim to press for the adoption of the so-called Murray Industrial Council Plan to settle production and labor problems.
Inclusion of John L. Lewis in this delegation is considered especially significant and everyone is watching closely to see what role Lewis has cut out for himself in the near future.
Having Julius Emspack of the Electrical Workers Union and Joe Curran of the Maritime Union on the committee likewise created a surprise since they indicate how closely the Stalinists are now working with the Roosevelt Administration, and what prominence is attached to their role!
Out of such a conglomeration of figures and conflicting interests, only a patchwork program can be expected, but one which may operate against labor’s interests.
Most ominous proposal before the conference is one which will receive both AFL and the manufacturers’ Support, and the CIO has to be on guard against it.
The proposal is to freeze present union relations and organization in all industries. This means that the CIO would promise to give up organizing the unorganized, especially in the South. And would also give up its efforts to obtain a union shop in the war industries.
This freezing order wouldn’t bother the AFL as much since it already has closed shop agreements in fields vital to its present form of existence. Labor unity proposals, too, if from the AFL, also will be made only to put the CIO behind the eight-ball.
 



When the widely heralded industry-labor conference concluded its deliberations this week by accepting a three-point “peace” program outlined by Senator Thomas, and backed by President Roosevelt, three salient fact’s stood out:

The industrialist bloc showed on every occasion; including their half-hearted acceptance, under protest, of the Roosevelt decision, that they intend to carry on their war against organized labor whenever and wherever possible!
 
Organized labor was pledged to bind itself to a War Labor Board similar to the National Defense Mediation Board from which its CIO representatives recently resigned because the board revealed itself during the captive coal mine, dispute to be a stooge for the union-hating steel barons.
 
But this time, in entering another mediation board set-up, organized labor gave up in advance the one weapon which enabled it to block the reactionary decision of the National Defense Mediation Board and win a real victory for unionism in the captive coal dispute. This weapon is the strike.

So labor, because of the shortsighted leadership of its top officials in the CIO and the AFL who are operating on a theory of “national unity at any cost,” finds itself back on the merry-go-round of mediation boards.
While the industrialists, knowing they conceded nothing at the conference, see a chance to stall off labor, over and over again, always trying to strangle the unions, and yelling that labor is breaking “national unity” if labor doesn’t submit to this treatment.
And the main factor which will keep the industrialists and their allies in the government from succeeding in their union-busting plans, is the inevitable growth of rank and file pressure, as in England during wartime, when conditions become oppressive in the plants.
 
A Patch-work
Thus, as we pointed out last week, any decisions of this conference, in fact the whole Labor Board which Roosevelt is creating, is essentially a patch-work to seek a compromise on the inevitable and conflicting interests of labor and industry.
The industrialists at the conference understood this basic fact better than the CIO and AFL leaders, who have a utopian pipe dream that labor and capital can live together in peace.
That is why the industrialists fought bitterly against any War, Labor Board even having the right to consider a union demand for a closed shop. Not to grant it, but just to consider it would be a crime, as far as the industrialists were concerned.
Such flagrant union-hating was too similar to the technique of a Girdler or the labor-baiting congressmen from the poll-tax districts of the South, for Roosevelt or his supporters to permit because it would expose the fakery in the war aims.
Instead, Roosevelt, sought to appear as the Great White Father of Labor by denying the industrialists their most extreme demand, which, to be sure, they haven’t given up hope yet of achieving.
The labor bloc at the conference felt it achieved a victory when the industrialists were unable to remove completely the question of the closed shop from the issues to be included for mediation by the new War Labor Board.
However, the next experience they have will again demonstrate to them what the captive coal mine strike taught many workers. That the only way they’ll obtain a union or closed shop is by exercising their economic power, or being in a position to do so, if the occasion warrants it.
Perhaps the first major test of the War Labor Board, whose personnel is expected to be announced shortly, will be its mediation of the SWOC demand for a union shop in the steel industry, a demand which is on the agenda when the present contracts run out in February.
It can be said in advance that in those cases where the pressure of the rank and file in the unions is so great that it is felt even in the highest government circles, the War Labor Board will find it expedient to grant some concessions.
Under the War Labor Board, labor will get what it fights for. Nothing else.
 



A dangerous precedent for organized labor was set last week when the United Mine Workers of America strike at the captive mines, involving 53,000 workers, was ended with the issue of union shop submitted to a special three-man arbitration board.
Although this “settlement” was cheered by many CIO and AFL leaders, the fact is that the retreat of the UMWA and John L. Lewis, its president, has ominous implications for the future, since labor was forced to accept arbitration of a basic union right, the union shop, when this right should be recognized without any argument.
Even if this special board grants the UMWA a union shop in the captive, mines, as authoritative reports from Washington declare it will, the victory gained is hardly compensated for by the acceptance of a “no-strike, arbitration” principle in future union struggles.
 
Miners Were Ready
The resentment reported among the strikers and the thousands of sympathy strikers over the acceptance of the arbitration proposal indicates not only that they were willing to fight to the end for a union shop; but also that Roosevelt has lost his grip on the miners.
However, many factors operated to put the UMWA in a position where outright rejection of Roosevelt’s proposal was not feasible.
John L. Lewis’ past political blunders, his entire record of accepting arbitration as a means of settling strikes, despite his recent belligerent statements, placed him in a contradictory and insoluble position which weakened his power in the coal strike. The ferocity of the press campaign, including some labor papers, against the coal strike, were not sufficiently offset by the UMWA statements.
Within the CIO itself, the appeasers of Wall Street (the Hillman and Stalinist forces) stood ready to stab the UMWA in the back at the first possible opportunity, and thus weakened the struggle of the miners.
Of course, any progressive union leadership in a similar situation might have had to accept the Roosevelt offer. But its statement explaining the situation would be so clear that the entire CIO union movement would understand exactly what was involved in this dangerous precedent, even if its acceptance was actually unavoidable.
 
Where They Blundered
Here the UMWA leaders, by ignoring a factual analysis of the situation and by establishing as a main point to approving of the arbitration proposal that the miners were patriotic, blundered in not pointing out that the main issue was the union shop versus the open shop, and not the miners’ patriotism.
The miners did a good job in resisting the ganging up of the press and Congress and Roosevelt against their interests. Their solidarity on the picket line was proof.
And when scabs poured gunfire into the strikers, its only effect was to strengthen the determination of the unionists. It also showed how despicable the newspapers acted in this strike, for there weren’t any editorials in leading newspapers decrying or deploring the violence. Nor did the labor-baiting congressmen have any speeches to make about “lawlessness.” These speeches and editorials are reserved solely for use against unionists protecting themselves. Violence and lawlessness by scabs is perfectly acceptable to the gentlemen of the press and Congress.
It is very likely that there was established over the week-end a behind-the-doors agreement between top CIO officials around Phillip Murray and the Roosevelt regime, of which the coal arbitration proposal was one part. Certain minor concessions may be forthcoming from the Roosevelt regime in an effort to further isolate Lewis within the CIO and to soothe labor with bread crumbs.
But the coal strike illustrated that the fundamental issues dividing capital and labor can not be diverted for long into pacts, arbitrations, soft-soap and bland promises of something better in the future.
The SWOC, for example, still has on its agenda the matter of a closed shop in the steel industry. The struggle will continue.
 



“It will not only be a long war. It will be a hard war.”
The seven-day work week ordered in all war industries by President Roosevelt in his first wartime address brought home to organized labor the stark reality of those words of the President.
“Industrialists ... must forego extra profit,” the president explained, in connection with the sacrifices of workers which have been ordered.
Big business will have to give up extra profit, the President declares. Extra profit! The six per cent as usual continues. The big homes, the expensive parties, the luxurious mode of life ... all these continue for the rich, while the workers suffer in a hard war.
All of labor’s gains in recent years, are threatened by the abrogation of union contracts involved in the presidential order. Millions of lives will be lost, before this war is over. It will be a hard war ... for labor.
But what’s hard about only giving up extra profits? Profits you haven’t got yet, anyhow?
“It is not a sacrifice for the industrialist to forego extra profits,” the President said. Correct. But why should he make profit at all, when everyone else is sacrificing even lives in the war effort? This is going to become the question of the day, and for the duration.
Labor must demand, in self-preservation, not only that all the profit be taken out of war, but also that double time be paid for all overtime, above a 40-hour week.
Isn’t this selfish? the newspapers will scream. No! For only by a steady increase in money wages will labor be able to keep up its already low standard of living, because prices are going to keep climbing.
The situation on the home front stresses the need, above all, of labor defense.
On the war front, the incompetence of the Navy brass hats has already become a national scandal, without full details being known. Roosevelt admits bad news from the Pacific. Arthur Krock, most conservative writer on the New York Times and chief of its Washington bureau, speaks about the “loss not being matched in our national history.”
The war crisis is a crisis of a bankrupt society and a bankrupt leadership. In three days this has been hammered home by events. More events and lessons will follow!
 



If life in the Army camps consisted only of learning the science of military training, there would be much to say for it. But it can not be divorced from the politics behind the present compulsory military training laws. Creating cannon-fodder for Wall Street’s wars is the aim of these laws.
Since it is primarily the youth of America who will be the backbone of the U.S. Army and Navy, profound changes are occurring in the country, above all, among the younger generation. He who has the youth has the future! A profound truth. Emphasized by the facts of today.
Liddel Hart is correct in stating that it takes only three months to train a soldier properly for modern combat. But conscription lasts one year, at least. War will prolong this service indefinitely. It is important to understand what the U.S. Army has in mind for the other nine months.
A good soldier is one who obeys automatically, acts automatically, and lights automatically. This concept is called discipline. The ideal of the U.S. Army is the Nazi military machine. The young Nazis who fought like devils, laughed at death, and stormed the strongest positions, they are the ideal soldiers – by military standards.
Inculcating their fanaticism is the primary aim of the one year training period in the U.S. Army now. You toughen up the recruits by exercise and drill. You teach them discipline in the process. But mechanical knowledge of the use of arms is not sufficient. It’s the spirit that counts. The Army might march on its stomach, but it fights with its heart and mind! Morale is the question of the day.
 
Fight? – For Whom?
Revolutionists and Wall Street agree on one thing: The youth should know how to fight. The whole question is; For Whom? For What! The revolutionary movement is unable to give this training directly to the youth in vast numbers. Its own forces are too small. The U.S. Army is going to do that job. But the Army wants to accomplish another task at the same time: convince the youth to stay on its side as the main prop of capitalism.
In its multifarious athletic activities, its citizenship classes, its movies, its drill, its dress parades, and it discipline, the Army tries to mold the youth into an “ideal” soldier. Into a soldier ready to die willingly for the preservation of Wall Street’s system of plunder. Since all the propaganda agencies, the whole force of the government and the “weight” of public opinion presses on the youth, superficial observers conclude that the Army will succeed. We think otherwise. Facts are stubborn things. They determine our ideas. That is why we think otherwise.
The scandal of Winthrop Rockefeller’s enlistment, his sudden removal from the hard life of Ft. Dix to quarters more suitable for a gentleman and sportsman does more to offset the whole army training program than a thousand soap-box speeches.
“I wanna be a Captain like Roosevelt,” is replaced by “I wanna be a Buck Private like Rockefeller.”
We’re sure the California Army camps are no different in this respect than others. At least we judge so from reading various reports. The first lesson one learns at Army camp is that men are not created free and equal. There are two classes, the officers and the men. And the officers live in a different world. After the first few exciting days at the camp the contrast is emphasized by the difference in quarters. Even the formerly unemployed, happy at first at the thought of three squares a day, begin to realize that the officers’ mess is something different, and better.
Food, clothing and shelter. In these fundamentals of existence, the Army teaches by the bitter school of experience that there are two classes and always will be as long as the present army lasts.
The brief period of adjustment to army life ends anywhere from a month to three, depending on the assimilatability and quickness of the conscriptee. Then comes another painful shock. Restless in their spare time, the conscriptees seek a social life, above all the company of women.
Walking past the officers’ quarters on the way lo a nearby town, the buck private sees the nice looking company of the officers, hears the music of an orchestra and the tinkle of cocktail glasses. This is not for him.
He walks into a town like Monterey, looking for a good time. These towns near army camps have experienced a fantastic boom. Prices are sky-high everywhere. A glass of beer for two bits, sandwiches upped 100%. Everywhere, like bloodsuckers, small merchants squeeze the pennies from under-paid soldiers.
In a series of five articles in the Los Angeles News, all, the details of this tragic story of cheating, and swindling, and double-crossing, and kicking around the rank and file was unfolded. This was true at every army camp in California. It must be shocking if it gets into the press, because the army has exerted much pressure for “discretion in reporting,” i.e., in clamping down a censorship.
Here is a typical story of “social life” of the conscriptees, taken from the News investigation.
“A large number of soldiers find their way to ‘Cannery Row,’ Monterey’s brothel center. Here in a stinking ramshackle building between two malodorous fish packing plants they purchase sex relations.
“They do it with a feeling of security because the rumor persists, ‘It’s safe, because these girls are inspected every week by army doctors. A girl’s card must be in order or she’ll be kicked out.’
“In the first place, if this were the case, the medical officer would be violating orders direct from the War Department.
“However, one hears persistent rumors of army medical officers examining girls throughout the country. If this is the case they are only instilling a feeling of false confidence in their enlisted men. For example:
“Recently on a soldiers’ pay day Monterey’s three houses took care of a vast throng of young men. Each house had about ten girls and each girl entertained 50 or more men throughout the night.
“Now if one of the first men to visit a girl had been infected, you may see how readily the disease could spread like wildfire even if a girl had had a thousand examinations the very day before the rush.”
Nice world of today and tomorrow the army life has to offer a young man. Not to mention the fate of the girls caught in an economic trap that sends them into the oldest profession whose last outpost is white slavery near an army camp.
Rather they will become much worse. Bitter experience, aided by careful political education conducted by the movement, will swing the youth into OUR camp.
 



LOS ANGELES – The aircraft companies have only one real weapon left with which lto stave off the victorious drive of the CIO in this area: the AFL machinists’ union. And the companies are using it.
This last week some of the shocking collusion between the companies and the AFL against militant industrial unionism came out when the CIO filed charges against the Consolidated Aircraft Co. before the NLRB.
One foreman, under company orders, offered a worker wearing a CIO button a ten cent per hour raise if he would take off the button. When he refused to sell himself, he was laid off because of “lack of work,” although that very department was hiring 45 men a week.
Other foremen have gone around offering a five cent an hour raise to men who join the AFL and take off their CIO buttons.
The AFL machinists’ union has a contract at Consolidated. It was arranged from the top without the knowledge of many workers. It was “won” in something of the manner by which William Green hopes to get a contract from Henry Ford. In fact, Consolidated is closely tied up with the Ford Motor Co. now.
The AFL sells itself to the aircraft manufacturer by confining its “demands” to a few score high skilled workers who are given raises, while the other workers get nothing. That’s the way it worked out in Consolidated.
Now the company and the AFL union see that, unless a few more workers are given individual benefits, the CIO will take over, for the CIO has a base there. So a few more bread crumbs will be tossed around.
Only the competition of the CIO has aroused the AFL leaders from their lethargy and indifference to the plight of the industrial workers.
Unless all present signs fail, however, the workers in Consolidated are wise to what is really going on. And the CIO drive which is to be followed by a demand for an election will bring real results in the shape of a bona fide union for the entire plant workers.
Unionists, blinded by too long association in the craft-dominated AFL, will view the CIO drive in Consolidated as a raid against an established union. That’s the bunk.
The CIO is the progressive section of the American labor movement precisely because it bases itself on and tries to organize mainly the industrial workers. The aircraft workers belong in that category.
 



William Randolph Hearst and the freedom of the press are two things that don’t go together. Labor hates Hearst for obvious and well-known reasons. His anti-unionism, his red-baiting, his race prejudices, his corruption and senility.
Currently, the Lord of San Simeon, that fabulous million acre estate is engaged in a dirty job of browbeating the press and blackmailing Hollywood.
His power is still sufficient to put an almost nation-wide ban on a sensational news story about the movie produced by Orson Welles, America’s bogey-man. Mr. Welles had the temerity to produce and portray Citizen Kane.
The New York Times, the New York Sun, Time magazine are thus far the only publications that have dared to print at least part of the story around this forthcoming movie. Hedda Hopper, a Hollywood movie columnist who is a rival of Hearst’s columnist, Louella Parsons, also discreetly said a little about the situation. Welles wrote and acted in this movie, which does a very good job of exposing the role of the Hearst press in America. It shows how the Hearst war-mongering created the hysteria for the Spanish-American war. It reveals the story of Hearst’s corruption of the press, and of the movies insofar as he is responsible.
This movie is almost as sensational as Welles’ notorious Invasion from Mars radio broadcast, und more powerful. It strikes a blow at the propaganda for war, at the role of the venile capitalist press. It’s social dynamite.
 
Plain and Fancy Blackmail
Such is the power of Hearst that, when the Madame Parsons demanded a special private preview of Citizen Kane, it was granted. Now Welles claims – and perhaps somewhere man exists who will believe -- that his story of a putrid publisher was not intended to portray Hearst. He neatly has placed Hearst in the position of “If the shoe fits, wear it.” The shoe fits.
How powerful capitalist interests influence Hollywood movies, and therefore the ideas of movie-going people, is revealed in the events subsequent to the Parsons-Hearst complaint against Citizen Kane.
RKO lop officials were directly contacted. As a hint of days to come, all RKO pictures either got poor reviews or were not mentioned at all. RKO publicity didn’t get a break. Parsons demanded that the picture be suppressed. International News Service, the wire association controlled by Hearst, was used as a club against RKO. Out of deference for a friend, the United Press and the Associated Press, thus far have ignored this story. Freedom of the press means the freedom to suppress stories that might educate the people, according to “ the big wire service standards.
But Hearst’s stooges didn’t stop at just merely that. An ace scandal-monger, Adela Rogers St. John, well-known to Hearst paper and Liberty magazine readers, was dispatched to Hollywood. Her job was simple. “Get the lowdown on Orson Welles and Dolores Del Rio.” Perhaps Welles could be blackmailed into withdrawing his movies.
Special investigators are snooping around Hollywood to get a basis for a sensational “anti-refugee” story. Some European actors are employed here, refugees from Hitler’s terror. Many of them are Jews. They constitute a very small proportion of the people employed here. Hearst has threatened to start a wave of anti-semitism around this issue, unless the Welles movie is buried. Of course, he won’t dare attack the British colony here, who function solely as propaganda agents of Churchill. Roosevelt will stop” that monkey business. Just the more helpless Jewish refugees.
 
People in Glass Houses
Al Capone never went at a job more thoroughly than Hearst is doing. Other reporters are digging up all the files on the private lives of RKO officials and stars, and all people connected with the Welles production. And there’ll be plenty of basis for blackmail, of course.
But this is very touchy ground for Hearst and Madame Parsons. People in glass houses shouldn’t throw stones. Douglas W. Churchill, of the New York Times, once wrote a very interesting chapter in the book, We Saw It Happen. It describes how Parsons forces contributions as “Christmas presents” from movie stars or else they are crucified in the entire Hearst press. And the presents aren’t small change, either. Hearst’s Marion Davies can’t be equated with Dolores Del Rio.
American newspapers are on the spot. Hollywood is on the spot. Hearst’s actions once again demonstrate what a lousy and corrupt press exists in America. If RKO releases Citizen Kane, Hearst will dig up a lot of mud, and Hollywood goes down another notch, if that is possible. If RKO changes or suppresses the picture, it simply shows how lousy and influenced Hollywood is by powerful capitalist interests.
When thieves fall out, an honest man has a chance. Perhaps the people will learn something valuable from the sensational news about to break. Or from the possible suppression of the whole affair.
 



CIO workers struck on every front this past week in a determined effort to resist the shifting of the war-burden on their shoulders.
A wave of strikes, temporary walk-outs and general demands for higher wages and better working conditions reached a high point. In steel. auto, packinghouse, aircraft, rubber and other basic industries the CIO was on the march again.
Impatient with the dilatory tactics of SWOC officials, workers in the huge and powerful Bethlehem Steel Corp. went on spontaneous walk-outs last week.
Bethlehem is the open shop steel company which is glutted with a billion dollars in war orders, while it maintains the lowest wage standards and the lousiest working conditions.
The mood of the Bethlehem workers is very significant. The rank and file is pressing the SWOC leadership to fight. It is restless and resentful. Bethlehem, a citadel of open shop-ism, is ready to be taken to town by the CIO.
The Allison-Chalmers workers in Milwaukee went on strike, officially called by the UAW-CIO.
Packinghouse workers in the meat packing areas are stirring and demanding CIO signed contracts with some improvements in their miserable existence.
Demands of the U.S. Rubber Co. workers on a national scale brought signed contracts at its various plants again because of the unrest among the rubberworkers involved.
 
Want More Pay
Phillip Murray, chairman of the CIO and SWOC chief, announced that a demand for a general ten per cent wage increase would be given to the U.S. Steel Corp. employing 250,000 steel workers. For a long time considerable dissatisfaction has been evident among those workers because they felt the union should fight harder for some demands. And the sentiment of the mineworkers for more wages because of the squeeze of the rising cost of living, has led to reports that John L. Lewis is going to ask the mine owners for a two dollar a day raise in miners wages.
Negotiations between the Crucible Steel Co. and the SWOC are under way too. Crucible steel workers have pulled many strikes in the last two years for better pay. The spontaneous walk out at the Carnegie-Illinois $700,000,000 plant at Irvin was ended only after strong insistence by Murray.
The Ryan aircraft victory, the drive at Douglas and Consolidated, the recent Vultee and Brewster strikes tell the story in aircraft.
Yes, the steel workers are finally stirring. And this despite the go easy, bureaucratic leadership of the SWOC which has kept an iron hand on the rank and file.
Of course, the CIO top leaders will compromise, and temporize, and retreat more and more in the future as the heat is turned on. But they have the powerful pressure of the rank and file on them. The spread of “unauthorized” walkouts is the best sign of this development.
The rapid drive of the Roosevelt regime towards all-out participation in war can only intensify the crisis in mass production industries between the bosses and the workers.
Despite the Churchills and Bevins, and war and bombings the English workers have gone on 184 strikes during the past year ... despite a slew of compulsory arbitration laws passed by the government.
American workers will do better. The economic impulsion of the phoney war boom makes this inevitable, and Roosevelt has less chance of smashing the labor movement in war-time than Churchill.
 



Henry Ford, once the undisputed czar of a billion dollar industrial empire, today faces a revolt of the men who slaved and toiled to create his wealth and power.
The flivver king was shaken on his open shop throne last week when the federal government finally withheld a war order from him because of his failure to obey labor laws.
The War department didn’t suddenly go pro-labor when it gave a $10,298,128 order for 11,731 trucks to another auto manufacturer. It was trying, under Roosevelt’s command, to appease the revolt of the Ford workers.
For the CIO is on the march on the sacred grounds of the River Rouge plants. In union there is strength. Ford workers have learned, and the CIO is the union.
 
Resentment Flares
CIO pressure forced the government to place the war order elsewhere. And it wasn’t the pressure of. Sidney Hillman, but rather the pressure ON Sidney Hillroan that caused even that worm to turn a little.
Ford was given $150,000,000 in government contracts without the slightest attention being paid to his violations of the Wagner Act and the Wages and Hours law. Hillman made a formal beef, but actually consented to this procedure.
The Ford workers, however, did not consent. Nor did teh autoworkers in general. A national scandal developed. And Ford workers flocked into the autoworkers union.
Such is the forward march of unionism among the Ford workers that a successful strike vote was taken at the Lincoln plant. And CIO members wore their buttons in the shop.
Unless you’ve ever lived in Detroit, it is difficult to appreciate how changed things are when a union man can proclaim himself as one in the Ford factories.
Harry Bennett’s goon squads, his spies, his thugs, his city police stooges, his Dearborn city council combined, couldn’t create a reign of terror strong enough to hold back the Ford workers. And Mr. Bennett never missed a trick from sluggings to murder of unionists.
Each time that the federal government gave Ford another contract, resentment within the plant flared. And resentment among the entire labor movement flared.
Ford’s anti-unionism was too flagrant, his “workers be damned” attitude too provoking, the unrest in Detroit too great for Roosevelt to let the situation get out of hand.
 
Out on a Limb
Even silver-tongued Roosevelt couldn’t sell another “war for democracy” to the autoworkers if he openly pats Ford on the back and fills his pockets with war profits while Ford lashes the workers in a vicious speed-up system.
Nor could Hillman be taken seriously by anyone except his office boy if he didn’t get some kind of a bread crumb to throw the hungry Detroit workers. The Ford scandal was spotlighted too well for old fashioned shenanigans to work.
Besides, Ford had climbed out on the limb too far. During Christmas season, other auto barons had given bonuses of one kind of another to their employees where the CIO was strong.
If Ford gave a bonus it would appear to be a victory for the CIO and it was already too strong among his employees. If Ford didn’t give a bonus his employees would resent it and the CIO would have another powerful argument for organization. Ford didn’t give the bonus.
Ford was on the run. He was forced to rehire many CIO men who had been discharged for wearing their union buttons in the shop. Another victory.
Ford’s strategy committee blundered again when it was announced “unofficially” that Ford would never meet with Sidney Hillman to discuss labor policy. (Ford’s anti-semitism came to the fore again with that statement).
 
Pulls a Boner
A friend of Ford’s explained that Ford would rather shut down his plants and retire than give in to the “closed shop.” Or Ford would rent his plants to the government for one dollar a year for war production..
How can Hillman sell the rank and file of the CIO this line when Ford wouldn’t even let Hillman lick his boots in a conference? Unless Hillman was treated at least like half a man his usefulness to Roosevelt as a labor sell-out artist would be gone.
Ford had made a mistake there. And his talk about never giving in to a closed shop was not taken seriously by anyone. At present that isn’t the main issue in the Ford plants.
But the blunder of blunders was the offer to give the government the factories to run for one-dollar a year. Ford’s friends who made the offer for him didn’t mean to have it taken seriously.
But it had within it the germs of a great idea. Ford has enough money to live on for the rest of his life. Why not have the government take the plants over, some workers asked.
Panic ensued at the Ford strategy committee meeting when those implications came out. Right away, denials were issued about the offer. But the damage had been done. The idea is spreading. Ford workers will like it best. (If the CIO would demand that the government take over Ford and give it to the union to run, they would have something.)
Ford’s bid to manufacture the trucks was turned down in order to get the minds of the workers off the subject of conscripting the war industries, especially under workers’ control.
 
Tide Can’t Be Stopped
This rebuff for Ford is a union victory. Everyone in Detroit knows it. Above all, its effect is to shatter once again the myth of the invincibility of Ford.
The autoworkers are doing this for themselves. They’ve had to put the pressure on the government, and Sidney Hillman. They’ll have to keep it up, and intensify it to organize Ford.
While the CIO moves too slowly at times, and its policy temporizes too frequently, the rising tide of unionism in the Ford dynasty is stronger than a breakwater here or there.
Ford’s autocratic grip is shaking now. The very foundations of his empire will overturn tomorrow. Under the banner of the CIO his thousands of vassals are rallying to fight for their freedom. And they have won the preliminary skirmishes.
 



SAN FRANCISCO – Rank and file machinists here refused to swallow the sell-out contract which Sidney Hillman, John P. Frey and other CIO and AFL leaders tried to shove down their throats.
Monday 1,500 AFL machinists and 700 CIO machinists in the Bay area hit the pavement to prevent wage cuts foisted on them by Hilfman et al. through a so-called “master contract.”
In this area, most machinists get $1.15 cents an hour. The Hillman Contract provided for $1.12 an hour.
For almost five years machinists have been getting double time for overtime. The Hillman contract provides for time and a half.
The present contract was signed by shipyard owners, Hillman’s direct representative and some top AFL leaders. Nobody asked Hillman to do this “service” for the rank and file. When the referendum was taken to vote on the contract, many of the local unions rejected it, as Labor Action reported.
 
Ranks Are Solid
The AFL got together the metal trades council in this region and by a majority vote they decided to accept it, announcing that local unions would have to go along.
But the solidarity of the ranks, both AFL and CIO, and their determination not to be buffaloed by national “defense” baloney, brought results different from those expected by the trade union officialdom.
The shipyards are shut down. Sixteen thousand other union men employed there have refused to walk through the picket lines.
The combined efforts of the AFL top leadership, and Sidney Hillman and the bosses failed to break the determination of the ranks.
Secretary of the Navy Frank Knox sent a wire saying a strike was sabotage of national defense. The workers hurled the lie back into his teeth.
John L. Frey, president of the AFL building trades department, said the strike was unauthorized. The local AFL business agents who are running the strike pointed out that Frey had nothing to do with the situation. It wasn’t under his jurisdiction. Besides, he is a colonel in the U.S. military intelligence and his heart belongs to the military machine, if he has one ...
William Green, president of the AFL, did his penny’s worth to try to break the strike. He called it an “outlaw strike.”
John Green, president of the CIO Shipyard Workers Union, also did his bit through a telegram to the shipyard owners, saying it was a strike in violation of the contract signed.
And you should have heard the newspapers scream.
All of them sang a song of sell-out. Nobody talked about the real issues. The fact that the workers have a right, to the higher pay and the right to strike.
 
A Real Showdown
It’s bothering the reactionaries no end to see the CIO and the AFL locally work together on this strike. Since the machinists are vital and there is a shortage of them, the union
is in a powerful position to win, despite. all the hysteria whipped up against them.
Huge police cordons were placed at the yards to try to intimidate the strikers. So far to no avail.
This is a real showdown between the ranks and the union bureaucrats doing their job for the Roosevelt Administration by trying to sell labor down the river.
 



SAN FRANCISCO – Every lousy trick in the books has been employed to try to break the strike of over 2,000 AFL and CIO machinists in the shipyards here, but the ranks are holding solid.
And 18,000 other unionists working in the yards have respected the picket lines, refusing to walk by them, in a remarkable demonstration of solidarity and defiance of orders from big shot AFL leaders.
The latest trick against the strikers was a threat of Acting Secretary of the Navy James Forrestal to use sailors and marines to bust the picket lines.
At a mass meeting, a union leader reminded the strikers that the coal miners had been threatened the same way and had stuck to their guns and won.
“John L. Lewis told them to call the army and see how much coal they could dig with bayonets. It is even harder to drive rivets with a bayonet.”
The strikers know that no one can take their jobs. There just aren’t skilled men around. Labor is finding its own power here. And that is why other techniques than old-fashioned picket line busting are being used.
Ma Perkins, Secretary of Labor. denounced the strike, hoping to frighten the workers. It was a puff of hot wind in a hurricane.
The AFL Metal Trades Council in the Bay area, of which the machinists are members, denounced the strike. but they haven’t got jurisdiction over the strikers and were told so in plain language.
John P. Frey, president of the AFL Metal Trades Department, even got the Los Angeles Metal Trades Council to pass a resolution against the strikers.
But all this was moire than counteracted by the immediate support given by other AFL unions and the whole state CIO movement. Even Harvey Brown. CIO president of the Machinists Union, endorsed the strike, since he saw his dominion invaded jurisdictionally by Frey.
Eli P. Oliver, a Hillman stooge, came here from Washington last week and tried to sell a fast deal to the local union leaders of the strike.
“Why don’t you come to a union meeting and tell the strikers this,” the local leaders taunted Oliver, while he cussed a blue streak, at which game the local boys showed him a thing or so, too.
“Tell it to the rank and file,” is the technique of the strike leaders to the various phonies who seek a behind-the-doors sell-out. So far, all have been afraid to face the strikers.
Frey, for example, threatens to head personally a march through the picket lines if the strike isn’t settled pretty soon. There are a lot of boys who would like to see him there. They just want to shake his hand, you understand.
Now there is a clever stunt engineered by Governor Olson for Tuesday night, which might take in some of the strikers.
Governor Olson came out with a statement admitting that the men are striking to maintain conditions and wages already won.
He added:
“I find a deep resentment against the assumption by the international president of the Metal Trades Department of the AFL (Frey), in whom the machinists do not seem to have confidence, of authority to make a contract without their approval.
“These machinists’ unions did reject the agreement when it was presented to them, as did all machinists’ locals from San Francisco north.
“A majority of the Bay Cities Metal Trades Council ratified it, but the objection to it, no withstanding that ratification, is that the machinists or other crafts are not represented according to their numerical strength.”
Now you can imagine how strong the strikers’ case is when even Governor Olson, who just got through signing three bills against which the entire labor movement, AFL and CIO, protested, comes out with a statement as accurate as this one.
He did it for a purpose. It will be revealed this Tuesday night, long before this story appears in LABOR ACTION. He is going to address the strikers.
The line will be:
“You are in the right: your leaders have sold you out, but what you must do is change leaders first. Meanwhile, as good patriots, go back to work.”
Yes, the strikers should bounce all the misleaders. But one excellent way of discrediting and defeating them is first to win the strike.
Olson is using the most insidious method of all to break the strike. He seeks to utilize the bitter resentment of the men against the sell-out artists in the AFL and the CIO to get the strikers to go back to work. Before the meeting Tuesday, the newspapers helped whip up a huge scare that the picket lines would be smashed Wednesday morning if the men didn’t accept the Olson sugar-coated poison pill.
What they all forgot in this situation, however, is that their actions and the role of the government officials did more to convince the workers that the war isn’t one for democracy, but rather for the rich man’s profits, than all the soap-box speeches in San Francisco since the First World War.
There’ll be no “national unity” here. The class lines have been too sharp and plain.
Labor, in opening its eyes up to what the war is really about, has already won a major victory in this strike. It can win a couple of more before this thing is over, Olson to the contrary notwithstanding.
*
The strike was called against a sell-out “yellow-dog” contract imposed on the unions through the unwanted, unasked-for agency of John P. Frey and the government’s shipbuilding stabilization committee. Among the many objectionable features of the contract, the one that sticks out like a phony penny is the provision of time and a half for overtime. In two strikes in 1936, totaling three and a half months, the unions won double time for overtime, which in effect, means less wages for the workers at a time when the cost of living is rising and the bosses are figuring profits in terms of astronomy.
Other features of the contract in which the workers figure to lose from their present agreement are related to the “no strike” clause. The terms of the new contract, signed for two years, call for “discussions” in regard to pay raises, with “no strike, no lockout.” This means the bosses can keep on discussing while all the men can do is take in the hot air. The AFL bureaucrats, who hate strikes like poison, are, of course, in favor of this clause. But the men are wise to the short change they are being handed.
 
How Arrived At
It is interesting to know how this so-called Pacific Coast master contract was arrived at. It developed from the shipbuilding stabilization conference, called by the shipbuilding stabilization committee. This committee, in turn, was established by the National Defense Advisory Commission – Sidney Hillman, superintendent.
Mr. Hillman, with the able assistance of Frey, dreamed up most of the contract in Washington, D.C., before even coming to the coast. Details were worked out in San Francisco and other Pacific Coast ports in conferences held from February 3 to April 3. On the committee were such labor-conscious persons as its chairman, Morris L. Cooke, industrial engineering consultant attached to the National Defense Advisory Commission; Gregory Harrison, representing the Pacific Coast shipyards; Admiral Emory S. Land of the U.S. Maritime Commission, and others. So-called labor “leaders” sitting in on the conferences did not represent the Pacific Coast unions; no representatives were elected to go from any union, and no union asked any of them to negotiate anything. The labor members present were “invited” to attend by the conference committee itself and, significantly enough, no CIO member was given an invitation. The CIO took no part in the discussions and had no voice in the decisions reached. This was strictly an AFL bureaucratic clam-bake, with no “outside” influence wanted.
 
Prevent Real Vote
After the committee had made the master contract to its own liking, it started the ball rolling to put it down the throats of the rank and file – no easy job, but with a little twisting here and there it was done. The first step was to prevent a true referendum vote of the membership. This little trick was accomplished by giving each international union in a port six votes; so that if, as was the case with the San Francisco area, there were three locals of a union, each would get two votes. Machinists Local 68, with a membership of 1,300, for example, got two votes and voted NO; Local 1330, with a membership of about 400, got two votes, and voted NO; Oakland Local 284, with no men at all in the shipyards with with a membership of less than 250, got two votes and voted YES. So it was that the democratic process was defeated and a minority, with the pressure of officials upon them, overrode the desires of the majority and drove in the reactionary “master contract.”
 



A 24-hour shutdown of all government projects in San Diego involving 13,000 AFL workers quickly brought wage adjustments demanded by the strikers.
This action came after the usual months of fooling around by Navy officials in regard to union negotiations. Since housing conditions are fantastic beyond description in San Diego – the terrific boom here makes it impossible to set up enough homes even if someone wanted to, and nobody does except at a huge profit – and the cost of living is sky high, the AFL workers have demanded a wage increase.
Their case was so sound that even local Naval officials admitted they were entitled to an increase. So the boys were stalled around by the higher-ups in Washington.
But the complete shutdown brought results fast. In 24 hours, to be exact. Almost before the newspapers had time to whip up a “sabotaging national defense “ baloney scare.
 
Prices Go Up Sky High
Folks out here got two stiff jolts last week that have everyone talking, plenty and furiously.
The conservative Los Angeles Times came out with a big story that the cost of living in this area will have increased by 50 per cent in September over that of one year ago.
Let me repeat that. In one year, the cost of living will have gone up 50 per cent, says a conservative newspaper!
If Labor Action said that, it would just be radical propaganda. Some people have doubted our analysis on this point.
But the facts are too painfully present for anyone to ignore any longer.
Already, since last September, the cost of living has gone up around 35 per cent. Rents here increase monthly, since the aircraft boom brings are nothing to write home about.
Food in the grocery stores and in the restaurants has gone up in a glaring fashion. Milk, sugar, meat, above all meat and bread, are some of the commodities where prices are high. And in restaurants, 35 cent meals have gone to 45 and fifty cents. Movie prices are up, since the whole burden of taxation has been foisted on the customer.
The pinch has been felt by every consumer.
Workers who got wage increases in the last six months find that they are having a harder time of making a go of things:
Some waitresses in a union told me that they get more and more complaints about the cost of meals – and they correctly add that they are tired of it, since they just work there too.
And you should hear the housewives talk about the way the grocery bill has gone up!
On top of all this has come the report from Washington about the new taxes planned to pay the cost of Wall Street’s war. Five cents on a pound of coffee! That stuck in our mind.
The other taxes all hit the poor man. The new income taxes will “hit the lower brackets, “ as they say in Washington.
The squeeze is just crushing. The whole process is nothin but a combined form of inflation, making the poor man pay for the rich man’s war.
In this, like in so many other things, the West Coast either goes up or comes down the fastest. Everything seems to operate that way here. And right now, inflation is what’s hitting the poor man below the belt.
It’s time for the unions to demand more, and for the housewives as an auxiliary, to form committees in neighborhoods to fight against the high prices.
And it should be done around the general idea of making the rich pay for their own war.
 
Legislature in Anti-Labor Session
Up in Sacramento a bunch of morons are meeting in what is supposed to be an august session of the State Legislature. Among other items they are considering are a few bills directed agains labor. Merely 4,000 bills! And they do this on money the tax payers pour out.
They have one bill, the Tenney law, which is aimed at “subversive “ organizations. It is calculated to smash all militant and revolutionary labor organizations, by imposing huge fines and jail sentences for membership, by demanding full financial accounts, publication of all membership and sympathizers lists, and we believe, reports on activities. It’s a cinch to pass and be signed in a few weeks.
In order to look like an economy body, these same gentlemen, many of them direct representatives of the Associated Farmers, also are trying to shift the whole burden of relief back to the counties, as was the case one hundred years ago in America.
Also, this would give the local Hitlers, who are entrenched in the relief set-up, a chance to use that weapon against unions by denying any aid to strikers.
In a brilliant stroke of genius, the pompous ignoramuses who are officially called the state education committee of the legislature, produced a profound idea on smashing Hitlerism. All school buses, by state law, will be painted red, white and blue, they recommend. Which prompted a cynical columnist to ask, “What, no stars? “ Obviously fifth column sabotage working in the committee.
 
Where’s Your Draft Card?
Once in a while the Los Angeles police department takes time out from its strike-breaking activities – when there aren’t any strikes in progress – to carry out what is known as a traffic drive. A bunch of bluecoats surround a busy highway and suddenly swoop down on all the motorists passing by. Flashlights glare into your eyes, your car is given a test, you’re asked a lot of questions and then permitted to drive on. It gives you the same feeling you get when watching a movie scene where the Gestapo surrounds a block and then goes to work on everyone who happens to be there.
This feeling has gotten stronger lately since the cops have begun their inquisition with the question – the very first question – Where’s your draft card?
Which reminds us of the latest news from California’s draft camps. Many letters coming from there to folks back home have been marked by one major complaint. Most of the men have been given furloughs to return home or visit the city tor a few days and they have been treated with such contempt, especially by what passes off as polite society, that they returned to camp vowing not to go to the city again.
“All the boys are sore and talking plenty about the treatment they got, “ is how one draftee expressed it.
But their solution is a cowardly one. Don’t stay at the camps. Take a bunch to town with you, and insist upon your rights.
 



SAN FRANCISCO – The malodorous smell of frame-up so reminiscent of the Moscow trials gets into one’s nostrils quickly when sitting in on the Harry Bridges deportation hearings.
Take the testimony of Maurice Cannalongo, a member of the firemen’s union, who was on the stand the day we attended. He’s a former member of the Communist Party and not very happy about his new role of stool pigeon.
The red-baiting, labor-hating government lawyer, Del Guercio, questioned Cannalongo about CP fraction meetings which Bridges is supposed to have attended (as though that was a crime!).
Cannalongo just couldn’t remember. So Del Guercio introduced three signed statements of Cannalongo’s which the FBI had obtained from him.
“Read these,” the government prosecutor ordered. Cannalongo looked up helplessly. “Who me? I can’t.” “But you signed them?” Del Guercio asked. A feeble “yes” came as an answer. “And they’re correct?” “Yes and no!” Cannalongo muttered. (He’s supposed to be helping the government.)
The statements said, in essence:

Cannalongo was at a top fraction meeting of the Communist Party in March 1937 in Seattle along with Bridges and others who are named;
The first statement was wrong in the date. It was May, and not March;
And the first statement was wrong in saying a certain Deitrich was there. He wasn’t.

Del Guercio then questioned Cannalongo to try to prove Bridges was a member of the party because he was there. But Cannalongo ducked saying yes.
When the government prosecutor tried to question Cannalongo on why he modified his first and major statement, Cannalongo just wouldn’t answer.
 
Prompted by FBI
So the defense lawyers started to question him. They tried to get him first to admit that the FBI had grabbed him, gently threatened him, and finally wrote the statements he signed after some discussion.
This made the government lawyers furious. They didn’t want the FBI methods exposed. The technique of “Now look, brother, we represent the government, we got the goods on you boys, so you might as well come across, cause it’ll be easier on you. Someone else is telling, anyhow!”
Then Cannalongo was asked why he signed a second and third statement modifying the first statement. Was it his idea? Not exactly, he said.
Did the FBI call him up and tell him about the mistake? Not exactly.
Did he call the FBI up and tell them his previous statement had some major errors in it? No, he did not.
How did he happen to remember the supposed meeting took place in May and not March? Maybe because it was that the discussion was on the CIO affiliation business. But wouldn’t that be true if the meeting look place either in March or May? Yes.
Did the FBI remind him of his mistake? “I wouldn’t put it that way!”
And the same kind of evasion look place in the questioning on the attendance of Deitrich.
It was plain to everyone in the court room that no half-way unprejudiced jury would ever vote against Bridges on that kind of testimony.
With a gallant disdain for formalities and even half-way credible witnesses, the FBI brought in the next man, testifying that Bridges was a Communist!
 
Civil Liberties Violated
The whole thing, in a nutshell, as everyone out here realizes, is that Bridges is being sandbagged, with no regard whatsoever for anything except a pretense of legal formality.
The government lawyers show the most insulting contempt possible for the workers. And the gray-haired old judge takes the whole hearing as a sort of glorified traffic case in a police court.
You watch every basic civil liberty being violated in this august federal court, room with the American flag overhead, the whole show appearing as mocking laughter at those who believe in American “democracy.”
In the court room audience you can see the representatives of the patriotic societies gloat. “He ought to be burned,” they tell you, with a sadistic gleam in their eye worthy of a Gestapo agent.
In the city, many AFL fakers gloat because they see Bridges’ deportation as a chance to get at the CIO which they hate more than they do the employers
On the waterfront, Bridges has plenty of support. Even Cannalongo, the stoolpigeon, said he thought “Bridges is being persecuted because the employers are sore at him.”
Bridges signed a lousy two year pact for the longshoremen with the employers partly to offset the heat generated against him. Business Week says some employers are rooting for him because they fear his deportation will bring in a new and more radical leadership.
The CIO understands this hearing, however, for what it essentially is. “Organized labor cannot stand idly by and witness the persecution of any of its leaders or members,” Phillip Murray, chairman of the CIO recently declared in setting up a special committee to help defend Bridges.
The Bridges case is essentially an attack on the CIO movement and the labor movement generally, because it takes away the right of the rank and file to elect and dispose by its own choosing its official leadership. It’s part of a national smear campaign against the labor movement. The San Francisco newspapers distort the hearings atrociously to whip up the public against the CIO. If Bridges should be found guilty and deported a hard blow will have been struck at labor and the unions. The bosses will follow this victory with innumerable assaults on labor.
This attack is facilitated by the stupidities and crimes of the Stalinists within the labor movement. Many workers are so embittered against the Stalinist policies that they fail to see the class lines in the case. Disagreements with the Stalinist policies belong within the union movement. It’s the job of the rank and file to oust them whenever their policies run counter to the interests of the union.
But it is not the job of any good union man to join up with the professional pay-triots and lynch the Stalinists or anyone else while Old Glory waves in shame.
A feeling of revulsion comes over you at the Bridges hearings when you watch the parade of stool-pigeons, human scum and professional labor-baiters doing their part to smash the labor movement and make America safe for Wall Street’s profits.
Against this array, every union man should stand shoulder to shoulder with Bridges in fighting against his deportation. Taking care of the “Commies” is strictly a family affair within the union. And the only real methods of fighting against them are honesty, loyalty, devotion and democracy within the union movement as an indispensable part of a militant program of fighting the bosses to the bitter end.
*
P.S. – How ironic! Bridges is getting it in the neck from the FBI by those very GPU methods which he defended so strongly in the union movement.
 



In the most significant labor struggle since the General Motors sit-down strike victory in 1937 which established the CIO, the mighty United Mine Workers of America under the leadership of John L. Lewis this week won all the early rounds in its titanic battle against Wall Street’s open shop drive, even though that master politician, President Roosevelt, openly directed the anti-labor forces.
By a series of brilliant and dramatic moves, John L. Lewis rallied the miners and the entire national CIO against Roosevelt’s threats and actions to aid the big steel companies owning the captive mines and thus gave Roosevelt his first major defeat in a year.
When Phillip Murray, president of the CIO, and Thomas Kennedy, secretary-treasurer of the United Mine Workers, resigned from Roosevelt’s Mediation Board because it openly revealed itself as a union-busting agency, Roosevelt’s plans to hogtie the labor movement into the war machine suffered a serious, setback.
This action killed half the joy of the labor-baiters in America when the National Mediation Board denied what it itself admitted was the right of the United Mine Workers – the right to have a union shop covering the 53,000 miners employed in the captive mines of the Big Steel companies.
 
Threats Fail
Roosevelt’s threats in the guise of “a solemn promise to keep production going,” that he would use federal troops to open the mines, was cheering news to the Wall Street capitalists and their many journalist stooges.
All of these people, ranging from Eugene Grace, president of Bethlehem Steel Co., to The Nation and The New Republic, thought that because of these threats and Roosevelt’s alleged influence among American workers, the UMWA would have to retreat and capitulate, with Lewis being smashed in the process. To their utter dismay and confusion, the crisis deliberately created by the Roosevelt Administration and the steel barons saws the resurgence of the CIO as a militant industrial union movement under Lewis’ direction. Instead of isolation, Lewis and the miners have the unqualified support of the entire CIO, even the Sidney Hillman and Stalinist stooges at the CIO convention being forced to pay lip service (at least) and loyalty to the principles of the CIO involved in the coal strike.
Surveys completed by the United Press and the New York newspaper PM show that the preponderant majority of the miners involved and the entire UMWA are solidly behind Lewis in this struggle to obtain the union shop in the captive mines.
The reactionaries didn’t think a strike was possible. But it was called. It was inconceivable that the whole CIO would back Lewis and the UMWA instead of Roosevelt on this issue. But it happened.
Roosevelt has maintained a discreet and ignoble silence the last few days, instead of immediately denouncing the strike, as he threatened, and calling out the federal troops to break it. For Roosevelt has been dazed, at least momentarily, by the events. He is losing his hold over the labor movement, indispensable to his war plans.
Neither Roosevelt nor the journalists nor the liberals understand the CIO fully. When Murray or Kennedy or the average CIO unionist expresses 100 support of Roosevelt’s policies, it does not mean, as these people think, that therefore the CIO will give up the principles upon which it stands and must maintain to keep itself going. The workers have an altogether different idea of what they think Roosevelt’s policies are and what Roosevelt knows they are.
How strongly the CIO feels about the union shop issue involved primarily in the coal strike is indicated by the fact that even the officials of the Amalgamated Clothing Workers Union, Sidney Hillman’s own machine, had to repudiate his policies and vote for the resolution supporting Lewis! And the strike-breaking Stalinists, too, went along, despite a miserable attempt of Michael Quill, Transport Workers president and big shot Stalinist at the CIO convention, to stick a needle into the UMWA by offering the suggestion that the six CIO vice-presidents go to Washington to assist in negotiating the settlement of the coal strike. This insult to the miners did not go unnoticed. It proposed to send half-baked bureaucrats and incompetents like Dalrymple of the Rubber Workers, a couple of Stalinist stooges, etc., to assist the hard and tough and experienced men around Lewis in the negotiations.
 
Victory Necessary
Victory for the CIO is as necessary for its future existence as was the General Motors strike success for its establishment as an industrial union movement.
If the miners can force Wall Street to recognize the union shop in the captive mines owned by the big steel corporations, then the CIO can go forward to achieve an aim long held by Phillip Murray and his associates, as chairman of the Steel Workers Organizing Committee, namely, to get a closed shop in the steel industry. That is why the present strike in coal directly involves the entire CIO and is not, as some reactionary writers say, an issue between Lewis and Roosevelt, etc. The settlement of this strike will be the precedent for all contracts in the basic industries between the CIO and the various mouthpieces that Wall Street employs to direct its huge industrial empire.
In his bristling blood and thunder speech Monday to the policy committee of the UMWA, John L. Lewis indicated that he understood what was involved.
Lewis scornfully pointed out the role of the labor-baiting southern congressmen and senators whose speeches against the CIO are printed in all the newspapers as “expressions of public opinion,” when actually they are based only on the industrial bosses’ and plantation owners’ ideas, who send them to Congress only by disenfranchising 12,000,000 Negro voters in the South.
Besides serving to reveal what a puppet of Wall Street Congress is, the coal strike exposed the fraudulent claim of the apologists of American capitalism that there is “national unity” between the workers and the bosses. Much of the bitterness against John L. Lewis in Washington is caused by the fact that he is, at present, the instrument through which the basic conflict in American society expresses itself.
The coal strike emphasizes once again the fact that American labor has not yet been tied down to the war machine, NOT BY A LONG SHOT!
 



HOLLYWOOD. – Behind, the day-to-day news of the Willie Bioff trial on charges of exerting $550,000 from movie industry magnates is a sensational story of the real labor situation in this cinema capital which is being largely suppressed.
For Willie Bioff, Chicago gangster, who became West Coast czar of the International Alliance of. Theater and Stage Employees, an AFL union, is a symbol of racketeering in the union movement whose origins and causes are being covered up by everyone from Westbrook Pegler, alleged foe of racketeering, to the movie magnates themselves.
And the truth about racketeering in the AFL is explained by the facts of the Bioff case, a classic example of this phenomenon.
Bioff obtained an “in” in the union movement when the Capone gang of Chicago muscled, murdered and slugged its way into control of some Chicago unions during the 1930s.
 
Bosses Call Him In
He first appeared in Hollywood when the CIO strike wave in 1935 had caused a stir in all workingmen, and the employees in the movie industry, 12,000 of them, began to think in terms of unionism again. The IATSE had been virtually broken in a 1933 strike. It had only 33 dues paying members when Bioff arrived here.
Joe Schenk, Jack Warner and other movie moguls, afraid of a genuine union movement which appeared inevitable, called Bioff here and signed a closed shop agreement with the IATSE.
The 12,000 workers had no say in the matter of the union contract or their own union leadership. They were forced into the union by the bosses. They were forced to accept Bioff’s dictatorship as special international representative appointed by the stooge of the Capone mobsters, George Browne, president of the IATSE and former vice-president of the AFL.
All dissidents in the union were fired from their jobs by the movie tycoons, whenever Bioff called them and asked them to. That is how Bioff remained in power. The bosses kept him there. They used their economic control over the workers to force racketeering on the union!
Westbrook Pegler never mentions this fact. Racketeering in the union movement is primarily a creation of and a weapon for the bosses. When the 3S3memberships of the IATSE expanded to 12,000, the workers fought hard against this whole lousy set-up. But the companies beat them, using Bioff as their tool.
The ties between Bioff and the movie magnates first came to public light in 1937 when it was discovered that Schenk, representing the movie industry, had given Bioff $100,000 cold cash as payment for his services as a tool of the industrialists.
Incensed by this scandal and aroused to fighting pitch by the successes of the CIO, militant movie workers fought for and obtained the right to hold an election between a newly formed CIO union and the IATSE. With a few bread crumbs passed out, coercion on the part of the bosses, Bioff’s rough stuff and other anti-labor devices, the CIO lost the election by a close margin.
Of course Bioff was an expensive dictator. Browne and he shared at least $500,000 in contributions from grateful movie magnates. Likewise he obtained, through assessments, over $2,000,000 in cash out of the hides of the workers.
When Bioff, partly under a lust for more revenue and power, and partly under demands of his masters, the movie magnates, tried to muscle into control of the Screen Actors Guild, he overplayed his hand, already running short from the scandals within his own union.
His old Chicago record, as a gangster and pimp, which was known but sort of concealed or not publicized, hit the headlines. A California State Legislature investigating committee had been afraid to touch on this aspect of his life. But persistent rank and file agitation, and Bioff becoming “too big for his britches” brought out the facts which Pegler then publicized and claimed as his own great discovery.
 
Schenk Spills Beans
Since all the financial skullduggery behind the scenes in Hollywood came out indirectly in the labor vs. Bioff battle, the U.S. Treasury Department found out that Hollywood’s bosses were indulging in the most flagrant tax dodging this country had ever seen.
Joe Schenk, man among men of the Hollywood top dogs, got it in the neck from the federal government when it was discovered how many millions he didn’t pay taxes on. Once Schenk saw his conviction was inevitable he spilled the beans on Bioff, and Bioff came next on the court docket.
Of course, the movie industry, with the aid of the press, is trying to pass off the whole Bioff scandal as extortion on the part of a gangster against a frightened boss. “He threatened us with strikes,” they weep. They are lying and they know it and we also know it.
Bioff threatened them, after they had brought him in and paid him. After he had the goods on them through their own conduct. Even then they could have forestalled any strike threat simply by paying higher wages. Anything but that, the bosses say.
It cost them over half a million to control the union via Bioff. This was much better than wage increases which might cost them $10,000,000 over a period of five years.
The alleged bribery of congressmen, senators and the courts hasn’t come out yet. It might not. It took ten years for the facts to come out that William Fox, former movie magnate, bought out a federal judge. But sooner or later the truth will out on this situation too.
 
A Lesson for Labor
There is an important lesson here: racketeers in the union movement are an importation of the bosses, an instrument they create and maintain in order, to keep down the rank and file workers in the shop.
William Green, president of the AFL, and his associates are guilty of shielding this fundamental fact from the workers and of assisting the bosses in keeping the racketeers in control of some AFL unions.
A reactionary like Westbrook Pegler tries to caver up these fundamental facts about the relations of the bosses to the racketeers by writing sensational stories about only one aspect of the racketeering. Thereby he hopes to conceal from the working man the power behind the scenes – the capitalist.
Bioff is guilty, of course. His guilt is part of the guilt of the capitalist class in its crimes against the union movement. The workers must not forget that basic truth.
Racketeering in the union movement will be abolished when the source of it is removed, namely the industrialists. Cleaning the unions of racketeers is part of the bigger struggle to clear the country of its truly big racketeers, the Wall Street gang, the Morgans, Rockefellers, duPonts, etc., who make Capone look like a piker.
 






Our movement takes great pride in the accomplishments of the American workers since last May Day because we have become an indivisible part of those struggles.
Toward those thousands of anonymous workers, who shut down Ford and Bethlehem, and Allis-Chalmers, and Vultee we feel the strongest bond of solidarity. The revolutionary movement has no life apart from that of the working class. Its victories and defeats, its laughter and its tears, we share in the plant, at home and in this society under which we exist.
We curse – and try to remedy – the fact that our forces are yet so small that we are unable to take greater responsibility and more work in the union movement. A union button is a badge of honor in our ranks, as it is everywhere when good union men meet.
And while we have much respect for the AFL rank and file and some of the militant unions within that organization, we are pro-CIO. For the future of the labor movement rests with the CIO.
The CIO organized the mass production industries. And it is primarily the CIO unions in the past year that fought the giant corporations to a standstill.



* * *
When the war hysteria was whipped up last spring after the collapse of France, and America began its vast preparations for imperialist war, the labor movement began to take it on the chin.
The steel and auto, and rubber and shipping barons grabbed up the juicy war orders and the profits started to roll in. Big business was happy. Fabulous profits were guaranteed by the government.
And the press, and radio, and movies, and the pulpit were used to fan a flaming fire of “patriotism” which was directed against the entire labor movement. In the name of “national defense,” union contracts were violated, men forced to work overtime, conditions ignored and strikes stigmatized. To protest was “unpatriotic.”
The labor-haters and the red-baiters had a field day. The presidential election was suspicious and, as we predicted, was proved to be phoney. Both Willkie and Roosevelt had the same program – Save Wall Street’s investments abroad and profits at home.
The CIO and AFL conventions reflected the pressure of the union-haters against organized labor. The AFL bureaucrats shrieked their servility and patriotism; the CIO leaders fumbled around; Lewis blundering into support of Willkie, and Hillman becoming office boy for Roosevelt.
Unable to see further ahead than their noses and dues payments, the labor bureaucrats cowed before the thunderous crash of world and domestic events. They knew that the program of big business and its lackeys, the pot-bellied senators and congressmen and local politicians, was to smash the unions. But the bureaucrats were afraid to say so, let alone fight seriously against this anti-union drive.
The CIO top leaders held out better against the pressure than the despicable William Green and his associates, although Sidney Hillman did his best to prove that within the CIO he could be as big a scoundrel as Green was in the AFL.
 
“Let’s Get Ours!”
Under the guise of “national unity” the politicians introduced legislation designed to make slaves of the men who toil in the factories. Lynch speeches against labor and howls about “Communist plots” proved to be the favorite sport of the congressional windbags.
Conscription was used as a threat against strikers. While big business went hog-wild making dough, every conceivable trick and device was used to curb and smash the labor movement.
And then, just when the big shots thought they had things their way – like the French capitalists thought they had – and life looked rosy for Ford, and Dupont, and Grace, and Morgan, and Rockefeller, and others, the silent voice of the shop workers was heard!
“The big shots are getting theirs, let’s get ours! My wife is raising hell about food prices going up. I’m tired of working like a dog, and being kicked around. I can get another job if I have to. Let’s do something about it!” In hundreds of shops thousands of workers were talking like this during the few minutes of lunch time, or while they were punching the clock card, or going home on the bus.
The newspapers didn’t carry page one stories about this rising sentiment of disgust, of resentment, and of being just plain fed up with things. The newspapers were too busy preaching that the “workers must sacrifice” while the big boys got fatter and richer.
On top of that, the very people who spoke piously about another “war for democracy,” kicked the unions right in the face, when it came to a simple democratic right – the right to organize and to bargain collectively. And that was the final straw.
 
Vultee Men Win
The first open expression of the feelings of the men in the shops came in southern California at the Vultee plant. The Valtee men were being organized into the CIO and getting kicked around for doing it. They were told to be satisfied with a lousy 50 cents an hour while the company was guaranteed 12 per cent clear profit after all expenses, taxes and bond interest was paid.
So the men hit the pavement. Do you remember the “shock” the manufacturers got, when that happened? How Martin Dies screamed about “red plots?” How a drunk army major tried to force the men back to work? How Sidney Hillman tried to discredit the strikers?
But the men stuck together. You couldn’t fool them with the talk about “crippling national defense.” They knew they deserved better consideration, higher wages, better conditions.
The Vultee strikers won! They proved again what the frightened labor bureaucrats didn’t believe, namely, that you can strike and you can win if you don’t fool around.
News of this victory flashed throughout the country, it stirred the hearts of the Harvester plant workers, the steel workers, the auto workers and other mass production employees. “WE CAN DO SOMETHING ABOUT IT.”
And they did!
The Vultee strike reminded them of the glorious days of the CIO arid the lessons of the Goodyear strike, the General Motors sitdowns, the Little Steel strike, when the manufacturers trembled before the challenge, ‘The CIO is on the march!”
A sharp pick-up in dues payments and participation in the unions was noticeable throughout the country. And union organization drives were meeting with success.
 
Allis-Chalmers
The Allis-Chalmers strike developed from incidents in the plant provoked by the company through hiring of some “toughs” to harass the union members. This grievance was the spark that set off the explosion. The union called a strike.
Despite Mr. Knudsen and Secretary of the Navy Knox – who owns some stock in Allis-Chalmers – and Governor Heil, and a red scare, and ravings about “sabotaging national defense” and other baloney, the workers remained solid.
So the cops, backed by the strike-breaking orders of Knudsen and Knox, tried busting the picket lines and aiding a “back-to-work” movement. They used an armed and moving fortress to terrorize the strikers, and they shot tear gas into the union ranks and clubbed the pickets.
But the Allis-Chalmers strikers remembered the lessons of the General Motors struggle. A huge mass picket line was the answer and when the cops played rough, they were taught a real lesson. The company had to shut down the plant again. And the cops were forced to call it quits.
In case any union man had doubts, the Office of Production Management (Knudsen-Hillman, etc.) showed it’s true colors, a super strike-breaking agency. And an ominous hint of the future was contained in Governor Heil’s moans about, “We haven’t got a National Guard to call and the Home Guard isn’t built up yet.”
 
Harvester Follows
Meanwhile, eyes were glued on Chicago where the International Harvester Co. workers were really revolting against the tyranny of the McCormick interest. All the threats and terror and discharges weren’t enough to keep down the spirit of the workers. They joined the CIO and went out to fight for their rights.
Chicago has a foul name in labor history. It goes back to the Haymarket days. To the frame-up and death of the Haymarket Martyrs. But for those workers who didn’t remember that struggle there was a more recent reminder of Chicago police brutality, backed by the government.
When the CIO boys formed picket lines by the Harvester plants, they knew that thousands of blue-coated thugs would be out there trying to crush them. They each asked themselves: “Will there be another Memorial Day massacre? Will we be shot down like dogs, clubbed, framed, blackjacked again?”
For two lifetime’s couldn’t erase the horror of that Memorial Day when the Chicago cops went berserk. When the Little Steel strike was broken in a bath of blood, while President Roosevelt tapped his cigarette holder and nonchalantly declared “A plague on both your houses.”
The Harvester strikers took their places in the front ranks of labor fighters in our history when they went out. In the face of that possibility. Of such calibre of men are revolutions made. The strikers got slugged, the AFL betrayed them by leading a back to work movement, and they bad to go back with the prospect of mediation at the bands of the new federal board. But they made their mark. They declared themselves men, not slaves. They have just begun to fight.
 
Bethlehem Boils
On a plane with the Chicago strikers, was the action of the men who sweat and toil in Bethlehem’s octopus steel plants. Since this company crushed the Little Steel Strike in 1937 its attitude toward the workers has been intolerable.
Over a billion dollars in war orders, unbelievable profits, favoritism from the federal government made Eugene Grace, czar of the company, and his board of directors crazy with power.
They laughed at the Walsh-Healy minimum wage bill, they sneered at the Wagner Act, they jeered at the National Labor Relations Board decisions, and fought the union all the way. They sponsored a company union, fired union men, terrorized the workers, and rode so roughshod that even a conservative labor leader like E.J. Lever of the SWOC said, “If you ever worked in Bethlehem you would not doubt that the Bethlehem corporation was stronger than the United States government.”
But the boys in the shops got fed up. The breaking point came recently when company union elections were being planned in the various plants. The resentment over the lousy wage, the terrible conditions and the kicking around boiled over.
At the Lackawanna, Bethlehem and Johnston plants in quick succession strikes were called. The SWOC leaders were forced into this action by a militant rank and file. In the usual pattern of strikes, the government agencies tried to get the men back to work without any settlement, then the cops tried their stuff. The union ranks held firmly and small gains were made. Little Steel is organized! Now the job is to get some more for the workers.
 
And Coal Too!
Four hundred thousand coal miners are on strike as we write these lines. The United Mine Workers of America are demanding a dollar a day increase and will get it. John L Lewis stepped back into the national limelight in these negotiations. His blast at the strike-breaking technique of Roosevelt’s new Mediation Board shows he hasn’t made peace yet with the war machine.
The coal strike added four martyrs to our long list of victims of capitalist terror. Four Harlan strikers were murdered. “Bloody Harlan” is organized. Unionism has always been a life and death question with the coal diggers there. We should pause and pay tribute on this May Day to those gallant soldiers of unionism who are always on the firing line at Harlan.
Surely these brief records of deeds of the workers since last May Day alone should be a matter of great pride. But that isn’t all. We can think of the sharecroppers and the California Oakies who are out on bitterly fought strikes in censored counties where we can’t even find out what’s happening. And the many other strikes and struggles.
 
Ford Is Taken
But most important of all, however, is the Ford strike. For Ford is the symbol of all that every good union man hates.
The year 1941 will be remembered in labor history as the year Ford was taken.
FORD WAS SHUT DOWN!
Four words! How petty the language! How magnificent the deed! Ford didn’t think it would happen. Neither did the government. Nor did most of the top CIO leaders!
Ford was shut down! Harry Bennett, boss of Ford’s Gestapo, thought he could provoke a small walkout by firing eight union militants – and then smash the CIO once and for all. The CIO leaders were scared. Michael Widman, head of the Ford CIO drive, had sent a wire to Washington saying he was afraid he couldn’t prevent a strike.
Like a tidal wave the Ford workers swept everything before the. Enough was enough! Years of terror from Bennett’s thugs had hardened their souls! Other auto workers under CIO contracts had higher wages, some security, some seniority and some respect as human beings from the company officials.
Eighty-five thousand Ford workers had cowered and bitterly complained to themselves long enough. The NLRE records had unfolded the whole story of Ford’s ruthless terror. His cynical violation of every half-way decent human standard.
The flivver king is the most hated man in America, and not just among his employees.
This hate flared out in the open. The men started to join the CIO. The government gave him fat war orders. The men fumed. It wasn’t getting easy to beat up union men, there were too many of them. Mass discharges only aroused more anger.
Sit-downs began! And the capitalist newspapers were afraid to mention the fact. Were afraid the idea would spread like it did in 1937.
When 20,000 workers sat down, it was a cinch. It was too late for piddling compromises. The Ford workers were determined to break through their shackles if only for a day. And they did. You can’t quiet down until the steam is let off.
Even when some few hundred misguided Negro workers were used against them in a fight, the Ford workers didn’t forget who they were sore at – Ford. They are trying to win the Negroes to the union banner.
Of course, the CIO leaders compromised. They accepted the proposals of Governor Wagoner, and the strike ended.
But this was only the first major battle! And the CIO won. Tomorrow in the shop the struggle continues, even more intensely.
 
May Day, 1941
May Day, 1941, comes with the workers carrying out the best traditions of this great labor holiday, a day dedicated to renewing and intensifying the struggle of the workers for their self-interest and progress.
And on May Day we can laugh at the fools who quote statistics to prove only a small per cent of the workers are engaged in strikes, thereby hoping to bury the class struggle and bow before the master class. This same stripe of statistician proved the Russian revolution was impossible in 1917 because of the “small number” of workers in Russia and their “backwardness.”
 



LOS ANGELES. April 6 – Los Angeles is about to be stripped or one of its most cherished honors – it is well on the way toward losing its place as “the home of the open shop.” Last week, 17 CIO led strikes were in progress in this cozy little stronghold of reaction.
And on this widespread front labor won hands down. Reaction has been more unabashed here than usual, too. Agencies for recruiting scab labor have been thriving in the open and police and municipal administrations have been outdoing themselves in fighting labor.
Notable example of what labor can do if it really decides to fight was the United Mine and Smelter Workers’ strike at the Price-Phister Brass Foundry. Here cars of scabs, guarded by official police escorts, were run into the plant daily. Police on duty at the works openly recruited passing motorists to help run the scabs through. And the usually vicious cops surpassed themselves in brutality as well. There were more than the customary number of unwarranted attacks on pickets – men and women alike.
This only added fuel to the fire of the union’s determination to see the strike through to a successful end. And they won. The contract they got calls for a beginning wage rate of 60 cents an hour, 65 cents after six months, a 5-cent-an-hour blanket raise, and 5 cents an hour additional for night shift workers. Reclassifications for 27 workers will mean a $4,000 yearly increase in wages.
Most important of all, the plant will have a closed shop. At the CIO industrial council meeting the union’s delegate revealed rather abashedly that the company had agreed to a union bulletin board on the door of the men’s lavatory. Another delegate got up and said, “I always knew where the the best place was to put a bulletin board, but this is the first time I’ve ever seen it written into a contract.”
The large number of Mexican delegates at the CIO council meetings is a good sign. Los Angeles Mexicans are used to being kicked around even more than the Negroes out here. So they, like the Negroes, offer one of the potentially most militant sources for union membership.
The council here is forging ahead in its anti-jim-crow drive and the Negroes are taking an ever move active part in the fight for a decent wage standard. Among the white unionists there is less jim-crow prejudice than might be expected. The real battle, recognized by white and Negro alike, is against the employers. They both realise that the sooner unity within labor is reached the sooner a strong fight against the common enemy can be waged.
 
Darnell Rubber Workers
The United Rubber Workers ended a hard-fought strike against the Darnell Rubber Company in Long Beach with a good contract. Wages now range from 62½ cents an hour to $1.15. Before the strike, the weekly spread had been from $14.50 to $25. The range now is from $25 to $46 per week.
Out of this strike came a demonstration of the progress workers out here are making in the only real school – the picket line. The Darnell workers learned through bitter experience with cop-employer brutality and strike breaking tactics that a labor victory depends ultimately on labor’s strength and not on “good will” or public opinion. Plans are now under way to form flying squadrons of unionists who will be ready for strike duty anywhere in the city. This recognition of the indispensability of workers’ defense guards is a real step forward for Los Angeles.
Because so much of this town has been open shop, workers out here have had little experience in real inter-union cooperation. Once they get the honest-to-God labor solidarity, there is nothing they can’t and won’t do. Because the boys out here are in the mood to try anything.
 
Discrimination in Aircraft Hiring
Aircraft management out here is crying in its beer because there is such a shortage of skilled labor. At the same lime any number of skilled workers are denied jobs because they are Negro, Oriental, or Mexican, or because they are not SECOND GENERATION Americans. Already Douglas and Vultee are hiring women on production jobs for which there is an oversupply of male workers who, however, can’t meet requirements that might have been cooked up by the membership committee of the DAR.
That can mean only one thing, since we know that the sabotage scare is nothing but a smokescreen for anything the capitalists want to put over on the public. The aircraft tycoons are not going to be caught short when we go to war. The Army isn’t so particular about the background of the men it recruits or drafts. And men who can’t get work even in these boom days are perfect bait for recruiting sergeants.
So the deal works two ways for the capitalists – they get more men for their army and they are prepared to keep production going to provide an uninterrupted flow of profits when the country goes on a total war footing.
 
Trona Outlook Good
The big strike of the United Mine and Smelter Workers at Trona is unsettled as this goes to press but the union delegate promises that the “most amazing union contract you have ever seen” will soon be announced. Be that as it may, amazing things have been happening in the company town of Trona since the strike was called several weeks ago.
Company cops have been in the company jail – afraid to come out – since the men hit the bricks. The union polices the town. Company officials wouldn’t hear of the closed shop before the strike, but now only men certified by the CIO can go into the plant. Other CIO unions in the state have been cooperating magnificently with food and funds, and the union can hold out indefinitely. But at the present writing, it looks as if this won’t be necessary.
 



Aiding the Chinese people defeat Japanese imperialism is a noteworthy and progressive action. It strikes a blow at the enemy of all colonial peoples: world imperialism.
While Europe suffers from the effects of war, increasing in its intensity daily, China still qualifies as the stamping ground of the Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse. Any account of the miseries of the Chinese people always bring to mind the question – How can human flesh stand this much?
Knowledge of this situation is so common that many people here felt rather good about the news that the American government announced new loans to the Chinese government. Of course, the Great Father in the White House was given credit in most newspapers for another noble humanitarian deed.
Mr. Roosevelt, after all, was a democrat, we were reminded. America in world politics has more than merely materialistic motives. Doubters were asked to look at the loans to China.
Well, we did just that. First we learned that loans to colonial countries are a time-honored device for strapping that country to the specific imperialist exploiter. The U.S. has several times in the past “loaned” money to China – and not always by request. Then, aided by a remarkable interview published in the Los Angeles Daily News and given by Nicol Smith, author and Far Eastern explorer got another slant on the loan. Mr. Smith drew no conclusions. His facts, however, speak for themselves. We checked them with a qualified expert on the Far East.
China is to repay the United States partly by shipping its tin supplies from the fabulous mines of Kochiu in the province of Yunan via the famous Burma road to this country. This transaction will help liquidate the loan. In other words, the new loan to China was primarily a business deal by which the U.S.A. received a much needed war metal, tin.
What’s wrong with the United States doing that? Why shouldn’t America feel it is helping the Chinese people by buying the tin mined there? Just a little trifle, to some people.
 
Slavery for Children
Let us tell you in Mr. Smith’s words about the tin mines in China. Remember them the next time you open a can of fruit or vegetables. Perhaps the tin came from China.
“The tin from Kochiu is mined by 25,000 children, sixty per cent of whom are under 10 years of age. None of the children miners are over 15 years old.
“The children, when running about the town present an appearance more fantastic than those seen at the Grand Guignol horror shows in Paris before the war.
“The bodies (they work naked, you know) have been tinted green by the arsenic content of the stuff in which they work. Then the red dust from the tin settles over their sweating bodies – you add to this their natural yellow hues and you have singular appearances.
“These children are sold into slavery by their families. They earn a penny a day. The first year, 20 per cent of them die. The second another 20 per cent.
“Some die later, after twelve lunar months of work in the mines, when they return home. Altogether 53 per cent of them die.
“The mine shafts are so small, you know, that only a child could enter them.
“The working children sleep in long barrack-like rooms. There is no sanitation system. Most of them suffer from inherited venereal diseases.
“They do not receive their penny a day wages, which are sent to those who sold them into slavery. Most of them soon learn to escape the horror of reality through fantastic dreams furnished by opium.
“One tenth of the world’s tin supply comes from the Kochiu district. The mine owners here are fabulously rich.
“One has a yearly income of $16,000,000 American money.
“They contribute heavily to the war chest of China, and for that reason the new order of Chiang Kai-shek as yet has not interfered with their methods of working the tin mines.
“Having so much money and nowhere to send it – although they are so rich they have their private armies – they gamble most of the time. And then they smoke opium, dressed in their bond street clothes.”
 
U.S. Gets the Gravy
And now the United States, through the diplomatic maneuvers of the humanitarian Roosevelt, gets the main benefits of this almost unbelievable exploitation of the Chinese children. Clever peoples, these Roosevelts. Japan’s blundering Imperialists can hardly refrain from admiring such finesse.
It’s all done under the guise of aiding the Chinese people.
Readers of English history might recall how shocked the English people were when Jonathan Swift satirically proposed that the poor children be eaten to put them out of their misery.
Civilization has progressed since then. The world doesn’t bother with satire anymore.
That is why we say that it will take only a few more similar acts of kindness by Mr. Roosevelt to reduce China into a semi-slave state, a vassal of American imperialism squeezing out Japan in their bloody struggle for domination of the Far East.
In the ghastly story of the mines of the Kochiu, each word written by the broken bodies and pitiful cries of anguish of helpless children, the Chinese people are learning the painful lesson that all imperialist nations, Japan, England and America as well, are their enemies. And that a Chinese mine owner is no different from a Henry Ford.
 



SAN DIEGO, Calif. – If you go on strike, we’ll conscript you immediately!
This strike-breaking threat was hurled at Ryan Aeronautical Co. workers by the local draft board here under advice of U.S. Army officials when the CIO union announced the results of a strike vote to enforce wage demands.
It was such an open exposé of the role of the U.S. Army and the conscription laws that national draft headquarters was forced to repudiate, at least in words, the stand of the Army officials and the draft board.
The attempted intimidation failed to budge the workers one inch. It incensed the labor movement greatly.
For the Ryan workers have a real issue. Average wages at the plant are 9½ cents less per hour than the national standard in aircraft, in organized and unorganized plants.
The big majority of Ryan men work 56 hours a week in order to make a total weekly pay of $25. They are able to eke out an existence only by slaving seven days a week.
The arrogance of the company is almost unbelievable. They are bucking the union all the way down the line, when everyone knows that the company is making huge profits. It has $10,000,000 in orders from the U.S. Government and England.
In the furious publicity campaign waged between the company and the CIO, the union has exposed the false wage claims of the company at every turn.
 
Threat Boomerangs
The company’s arrogance came from their belief that with the aid of the threats from U.S. Army officials and the draft board they could force the workers to submit to their present lousy wages and hours.
San Diego newspapers proclaimed the threats of the officials as though that would settle the matter.
The Army officials explained in detail how they would apply to strikers the clause which says that not working changes one’s deferment status. This possible move, incidentally, was exposed two months ago by Labor Action in its analysis of the conscription law.
CIO officials wired protests to President Roosevelt and the national draft headquarters in order to get public attention to the attempted strike-breaking.
Antagonism against the Army flared in the whole labor movement here because of these threats. It was pulled too crudely and too quickly. In fact il boomeranged. That is why the national draft headquarters repudiated the local board.
Since that day the CIO and Ryan management have been meeting without any break in the deadlock. So the CIO was forced to set a deadline of Jan. 21 for the strike.
Richard Frankensteen, autoworkers’ international representative sent out by President R.J. Thomas especially to handle this situation, has notified the national CIO, the defense commission and other agencies of each step in the situation.
It will be difficult for Sidney Hillman or anyone else to yell that the strike was called without proper notification, etc. in the event it is called.
Meanwhile all plans were made for the strike. A soup kitchen has been set up, picket cards issued, etc.
While the CIO is trying to obtain a 75 cent hourly minimum for the 1,500 Ryan workers, it is expected that they would accept a compromise similar to the one in the Vultee contract. So far, however, the company has refused to budge from a 50 cent minimum.
 



Aircraft union news takes the lead again this week.
A significant straw in the wind on union organization trends was the result of the National Labor Relations Board election this week at the Haverill Aircraft Casting Corp., a small company located here.
The CIO won the election with 162 votes against the 47 cast for the AFL machinists union. Forty nine workers failed to vote for either union. The Vultee strike victory and the militant organization methods of the CIO in this election campaign clinched the victory.
*
President Roosevelt’s well-timed blow at the eight hour day and union standards, via his announcement on the recently obtained naval bases from England, was hailed with glee by aircraft manufacturers here.
It coincided perfectly with moves at Lockheed and other plants announcing a 56 hour week in many departments, thus following the example set at the Boeing plant in Seattle, Washington.
An eight hour day, seven days a week, is planned for some production workers. Others will toil ten hours a day for five days and put in six hours on Saturday.
Looks like the bosses want to teach the workers once again that under capitalism they live to work rather than work to live. Since the union contracts force payment of overtime, there will not be serious objection at first to the long schedule of work. Many of the aircraft workers here have not had jobs for a long time, and want a chance to catch up on their debts.
But this feeling won’t last long. First, it becomes very monotonous to just work eat and sleep for seven days a week. Second, the wife or girl friend will soon begin to kick when husband or boy friend makes her a workers’ widow.
And more important, the rising price level will tend to offset the extra earnings, and the boys will find themselves working the long hours and getting no more in REAL wages than at present!
*
How many jobs would be created in Southern California aircraft industry if a five-day forty hour week were established? Union officials estimate at least 30,000 more jobs!
In the light of this fact, one can appreciate more thoroughly how little concerned the government and industry are to solve the problem of unemployment. It’s a job for the union movement!
*
In our previous column we spoke of the tremendous expansion of the aircraft industry. Everyone has read about this in one newspaper or another. Now we have obtained some partial figures on expansion that give more details.

Lockheed plant: floor space increased from 668,000 to 1,139,200 square feet, personnel from 7,400 to 17,400.
 
Douglas Aircraft: floor space from 1,600,000 to 1,875,000 square feet; personnel from 14,000 to 19,200.
 
Vultee: floor space from 281,000 to 720.000 square feet; personnel from 848 to 5,400.
 
Northrop: floor space from 13,000 to 516,000 square feet; personnel 73 to 2,600.
 
And at North American Aviation personnel (the only figure available) grew from 4,300 to 8,500.

This expansion occurred during the past year!
*
Efforts of the Boeing management in Seattle, Washington, and the international officers of the AFL machinists union, to turn the powerful local union there into a semi-company union by way of a red purge appeared to be boomeranging on them.
Newspapers throughout the country carried the story of the vote of expulsion against Don Keppler, vice president of the local, and the presentation of charges against other union officials. Very few of the papers, however, pointed out that the trial board which maneuvered this union-dividing stunt was headed by a well-known police spy.
And even fewer newspapers’ carried the story of subsequent developments which are a credit to the progressive tendencies of the aircraft workers.
Keppler and his associates in the union demanded a vote by ballot on the trial board recommendations that he be fined $5,000 for Communist activities and also be expelled from the union.
In the balloting the vote was 1,635 to 1,160 in favor of the trial board’s report. But this fell far short of the 2/3 majority needed to carry the recommendations. This was a victory against the stool pigeons.
The trial board had also found Hugo Lundquist, young business agent of the local, “guilty of red activities.” But the rank and file was wise to the scheme behind this red scare. They voted 1,336 to 921 to exonerate Lundquist of all the charges made against him! They rejected the proposition that he be fined $10,000 and be expelled from the union!
And the pay off came when the union membership by a vote of 1,174 to 820 found Cliff Stone, Lundquist’s accuser, and the police spy on the trial board, guilty of “spreading false and malicious statements.”
The affair is by no means settled yet. The AFL machinists international office sent a warning to the local to rid itself of red influences or else it would take a hand. Of course this move played into the hands of the trial board.
It should be remembered in this connection that over a year ago in Liberty magazine, officials of the AFL machinists pointed out that they had an espionage system throughout the union cooperating with the FBI in “ferreting out reds, agitators, etc., etc.”
While all the internal trouble was occupying the attention of the Boeing unionists, the company not only instituted an extra day’s work in some departments, but also laid off men in other departments. By putting up a strong fight against these blows at the workers, the Lundquist-Keppler group were able to gain enough prestige to swing the tide towards them.
We would not be surprised if the Boeing situation ended up with the local going into the CIO since Lundquist and company are friends of Wyndham Mortimer and his associates in the auto workers.
 



Speaking before an audience of 100 Negroes recently on the burning issue of Negroes in aircraft, we summed up the whole situation in one phrase: jim-crowism.
And that’s about the size of it. A royal run-around, a kicking around, and an endless merry-go-round is all that Negroes have been getting when seeking employment in the aircraft industry.
There are a total of 8 Negroes employed in production, out of over 60.000 workers in this area. They work at Douglas. The company put them on after a pressure campaign by Negro organizations. This bread crumb is supposed to prove that Douglas doesn’t discriminate. But everyone is wise to that one.
Before we discuss what has happened to Negroes seeking work in aircraft, let us point out that they expect to get jobs just like anyone else for the very good reason that they have the same rights to work and live as anyone else. Besides, they know they’ll be called on to die during war, and they feel a country isn’t worth dying for unless they can live like men in it beforehand. The large Negro population in Los Angeles, numbering over 75,000, is very bitter about jim-crowism in general and even more so about the exclusion of Negroes from war industries. And they are most bitter about aircraft because of the lousy deal they get.
 
When They Go For A Job
When young Negroes go to an aircraft plant, the management tells them that they would be very glad to hire them but they are inexperienced. “We don’t discriminate, but of course we must have trained men,” is the story.
So the Negroes go to the trade schools and apply for training in various aircraft jobs. At the schools they are told,
“We’d be very glad to teach you, but the aircraft companies don’t hire any Negroes so it would be a waste of time. We feel that under the circumstances we should not admit you to school.”
That’s what the more astute and polite bosses stooges tell the Negroes. Others tell them point blank, “You got to be a white man to handle that kind of work. You’re not smart enough.” And similar insults.
The Negroes have experienced so much of this that they had a hard time believing that a white man, myself, was willing to aid them in a campaign to place Negroes in aircraft. The chairman of the meeting carefully explained that I was not running for office or getting paid, but that I was just as hot and bothered about the injustice as they, because I believed in class solidarity as a step towards building socialism.
 
Union Takes Courageous Stand
Not the least ticklish problem in connection with this situation is the attitude of the union movement.
Only one aircraft union has dared to face the issue, has had the courage lo lake a stand on it. This is the Vultee CIO union.
The Vultee union took a stand on the question of Negroes in aircraft, after a disgraceful incident at the Vultee strike victory dance. Some Negro unionists came to attend the dance and were asked to leave. They had to leave.
A resolution was introduced at the next union meeting at which speeches were given by militants and Stalinists explaining the disgrace this was to the best traditions of the CIO and showing the need for class solidarity.
The resolution, which called for an apology, passed. It also put the union on record against racial discrimination, affirmed the Negro’s right to work in aircraft, and pledged the union to assist in this struggle. The resolution passed by a substantial majority, not unanimously. As a matter of fact, its passage, to put the truth bluntly, hurt the CIO temporarily in the drive to organize aircraft, because so many of the aircraft workers are while chauvinists at present.
The white workers are easily duped by the bosses and their stooges who tell them that if Negroes are hired, white men will lose their jobs. The CIO is doing a good job of exposing this lie. Aircraft industry is still hiring hundreds of men weekly. New jobs are always being created. And Negroes should have their share of them.
One of the Negro organizations here which has taken up the struggle is the militant American Advancement League. The National Negro Congress, a CP controlled outfit, has also raised the issue.
Groups of Negroes are demanding training at least at their own trade school, which the NYC has set up. And they intend to go to the plants and demand jobs or else picket the employment office, we’ve been informed. This is going to be a long and hard struggle. It will first be necessary to teach the union movement why the white workers must unite with the Negroes in this fight. It won’t be a picnic to force the NYA to give classes to the applicants. Nor are the companies going to be convinced easily.
But, as we told the audience
“You know you never got a thing in life unless you fought bitterly for it. You have nothing lo lose. Your lives can’t become more miserable no matter how this thing ends up.”
“Soon we’ll have to fight and die for nothing in another phoney war to save democracy which we don’t have. Surely its better to fight and die for something worthwhile.”
The response was such that we have confidence in the future. Fighting jim-crowism in aircraft isn’t the only fight these splendid people are going to make.
 



The band just finished a hot number. Without waiting for the applause to die down, it softly swung into God Bless America. The pasty-faced orchestra leader walked up to the mike. He took out a piece of paper from his pocket and began to rant.
“America is the home of democracy, where we are all free and equal. We must beware of the fifth column, etc., etc.”
Just as we began to laugh at what’ we considered a fairly clever takeoff on the current vogue for patriotism, the cornet blared out with a stirring Army bugle call. A roll of drums thundered off the stage.
Out marched a regular Army color guard, with a bevy of beauties trailing behind it. The orchestra played the Stars and Stripes Forever, while this contingent paraded around the stage.
The audience stood up and cheered. The music stopped. A stupid looking lieutenant stiffly walked out from off stage, saluted the band leader, then the audience, and said:
“The United States Army welcomes this opportunity to invite young men to join the colors, etc., etc.”
While we cursed our luck in getting into this kind of situation at one of the largest theaters here, and awaited the moment when the cuties left the stage to come marching down with volunteer cards for the Army, the fellow next to me said, “My God, just like the movies.”
 
No Bottleneck in War Movies
Just like the movies! How perfectly expressed. For despite the Hays office denials, Hollywood war production is in full bloom, there are no bottlenecks. Every one has knuckled under.
And we are not referring to the usual tripe which has poured out in the last year. The Warner Brothers shorts with their horrible distortion of American history. Or the flag-waving, and the playing of the Star Spangled Banner at all theaters.
Or to the alleged anti-Nazi movies which in reality were pro-British and pro-war. The financial failure of these movies (I Married a Nazi, etc.) are used by Hollywood apologists to prove Hollywood won’t make pro-war pictures since they don’t go over. Those efforts were too crude, satisfying only to the intelligence of a Hollywood producer.
There are bigger fish to fry now. When President Roosevelt had Carole Lombard and Clark Gable at his side while he whipped up the war spirit in his last radio address, he showed how well Washington understands the role of Hollywood these days.
First, Hollywood has been given the difficult job of selling the draft to the young men. Of popularizing it with the people. And the best comedy talent out here has been drafted to put over Army life to the country. Four studios are rushing to get the message across to the public. Bob Hope’s Caught in the Draft, is supposed to be the killer-diller. And you should see the Army hostesses in the movie plays! They aren’t missing a trick.
Orders have gone around in the largest studios to put patriotic speeches everywhere possible. Fathers talking to sons and mothers to daughters and vice versa must now speak of duty to their country. One movie was held up this week to put some of that stuff in.
Deanna Durbin’s latest production was shifted around so a couple of Army scenes could be crammed in. You’ll have a hard time finding any movie from now on, that doesn’t obviously use the war-mongering leit-motif.
And the campaign to sell Yankee imperialism to the South Americans is just getting under way. Hollywood burned its fingers with Down Argentine Way. It insulted the intelligence of the South Americans too much. But they have brought in a flock of experts and expect to mend their ways.
Navy pictures always did their bit for Uncle Sam. They’ll glorify life on the sea on a grand scale now. What about the Negro messboys on the Philadelphia? What vulgar person brought that up?
 
Pinks Fall Off Stalinist Wagon
All the “pink intellectuals” who played ball with the Stalinists in the pro-Roosevelt days have fallen off the band-wagon here. Some like Melvyn Douglas went through a public confession via a stinkeroo like He Stayed For Breakfast. All these mental guttersnipes spend their spare time devising ways and means to repudiate their past and help Roosevelt save America for Wall Street.
Once it was the vogue to be pro-labor. And to be a member of some committee or another which the Stalinist set up to milk the unsuspecting. Only the haughty British colony looked down on these plebeian activities.
Now the British colony reigns over the social life in Hollywood veritably like the Viceroy does over the Indian masses. Douglas Fairbanks Jr’s phoney English accent finally is taken seriously.
Stars go on national tours now to show Hollywood has the country’s welfare at heart. The train loads which tour the villages on the way to a world premiere make a stock in trade of patriotic speeches to the “yokels,” while inside the train ...
Drunken orgies have been dignified now. It’s all a patriotic duty! And the newspapers have the nerve to print a full page of pictures showing the glamour boys and gals getting pie-eyed at an alleged benefit.
No Nero fiddling while Rome burned surpasses the Hollywood colony of today in cynicism, decadence and debauchery. History has seen this spectacle before. In Babylon, in the France of Louis XV, in Czarist Russia.
The hand writing on the wall is clear.
 



California puzzled and dazzled the rest of the country for a long time. It was considered the seal of the crack pot political movements ranging from Upton Sinclair’s Epic Plan to the Ham and Eggs campaign. Its labor movement centered around the spectacular events of the San Francisco general strike in 1934; Harry Lundeberg and Harry Bridges became nationally known, and obtained publicity far beyond the strength and importance of their unions, compared to other powerful national unions.
But this was California. It was the home of Hollywood, the modern Babylon, the fantastic center of movies.
This was truly the land of make believe. Grapes of Wrath was a sour note, no doubt. But, after all, the movie companies, did make some money on it, Steinbeck got rich, and the Associated Farmers basked in national publicity, even though it was unfavorable.
It was all taken in stride, without a serious stumble. Now it is different. Contemporary California is as puzzled and dazzled by itself as the rest of the country used to be. Although California doesn’t know it, it has become the classic model of America, 1941 style. In its present development are compressed the whole life and problems of society today.
The war boom has hit California. It sky-rocketed the air industry into the major industrial development here. It created a new and powerful proletariat overnight. It brought wealth and riches to industrialists beyond their most fantastic dreams.
Once people talked about the huge movie salaries and the few millions of dollars made by the cinema companies. Now they try to grasp the fact that a small handful of manufacturers are guaranteed nearly $100,000,000 profit in the next two years for producing airplanes.
It took the auto and steel industries years of development, monopoly, growth, expansion and hard competition to reach the billion dollar class. Literally overnight, some small fry here found themselves at the head of an industry with nearly one billion dollars in advance orders.
Douglass and the other aircraft companies just can’t stand this prosperity. Stories circulate about their blindness and the blunders made by them daily. Other industries spend millions of dollars advertising to sell the product. The aircraft industry is swamped with orders. It catches hell for not producing more and fast enough.
Of course, General Motors is gobbling up Douglass, and the other companies won’t stay out of Wall Street’s clutches very long. Profits are too juicy to permit independent capitalists. But until this happens, the small fry are playing kingfish.
Confusion reigns at the top of the industry. The U.S. Army chiefs blast the air manufacturers for a lag in production. The industrialists blame the lag on the constant changing of plans by the Army bureaucrats who don’t understand industrial problems. Both are right about each other.
Understanding this general situation is vital to the labor and revolutionary movement. It offers the objective conditions for some marvelous forward strides by the union movement. And with the success of the workers, comes the growth of the revolutionary cadres. The prospects are excellent.
The CIO enters this picture with experience on its side which gives much hope for the organizing campaign it has launched. The bosses are swimming in circles from their own production problems. The dizzy pace of developments has them reeling. The CIO can concentrate on one thing; organizing, It is used to dealing with powerful industrial concerns like General Motors. The aircraft manufacturers have the open shop mentality of a small shop keeper confronting a craft union.
To be sure, the ClO has competition – the AFL machinists union. It is competition only in the sense that the aircraft companies might give the AFL contracts on a less adequate basis to keep out the more militant CIO. But the perennial blindness of the AFL leaders precludes any real threat there.
The CIO stands for the great struggles in auto, steel, rubber and other basic industries. The auto workers union is tackling not only aircraft but also hitting at Henry Ford. It has done in the last five years what the AFL never dared do, namely organize the auto workers. The AFL machinists has a lousy record.
The CIO stands for industrial unionism. The AFL machinists supported the resolution at the recent AFL convention giving the craft unions the right to take out members from federal unions. Already, local AFL officials have warned the Lockheed and Vega workers that President Brown of the Machinists has agreed to let them be divided up by the craft unions.
Soon the 8,500 workers at the North American Aviation company will vote on whether to choose the CIO auto workers or the AFL pattern makers as sole collective bargaining agent in competition with a company union. The workers should vote for the CIO.
In a sense, this NLRB vote will furnish us with an indication of the trend of the workers towards either the CIO or the AFL. Let us repeat, we hope the workers exercise good judgment and vote for the CIO which has much more to offer them in this field than the AFL. It will be difficult for manufacturers to stop a union organization drive. The unions can do a great deal for the workers, and the bosses aren’t in a very good position to fight them without the most open strike-breaking tactics on the part of the federal government.
But even the Sidney Hillmans are hard put to it in defending the aircraft manufacturers. These gentlemen are simply rolling in wealth and profits. Everyone believes the aircraft workers should get higher wages. This is the unanswerable argument of the CIO in its struggle for the aircraft workers.
This intensified struggle between capital and labor will be the dominant factor in California life in the next year. San Francisco is a strong union town now. The shipping industry is well organized. Now Los Angeles and Southern California are becoming a huge industrial center, and union campaigns are already under way.
The Dept. of Labor estimates that over 425,000 men will be employed in aircraft before 1942. Over 100,000 of them will be concentrated in this area. Los Angeles will become the Detroit of the West Coast at this rate of development.
Just as California is at the peak of the war boom, it will sink to the depths of the post-war crash. This will open a new epoch of struggles. It is common knowledge that the end of war means the inevitable collapse of the war industries, with the streets jammed with thousands of suddenly unemployed workers. If they have learned the lessons of union organization, the need for militant struggle, undying hatred for the bosses who exploit them – these workers will not be hopeless and lost souls. They will have the iron discipline of the factory, the education of union experience, and a leadership which arose from its own ranks in the plants. California workers can prepare themselves for the big days ahead. They seem to be doing a pretty good job already.
And once again this stale will undergo a transformation, put this time a fundamental one.
 
California “Reforms” Its Youth
For years there were whispers about conditions at the Whittier State School (reformatory) for boys. About the merciless beatings given by thugs in guards’ uniforms lo the young boys sent there by juvenile courts.
Mexican youth especially were the target of the bluecoat sadists The Mexican youth had few friends outside, less pull.
Attempts to investigate the situation usually were forestalled by setting up fake committees which whitewashed this hell-hole.
A Hollywood committee headed by Frank Scully finally was able to get its teeth into something when a 12-year old boy was found dead, ostensibly a “suicide.”
Despite serious criticism of conditions which came from a state committee, prison officials exonerated the staff.
Another youth, 15 years old, was also found a “suicide.” This time the situation was cracked wide open. Competent testimony revealed that the boy was “hanged” after he was dead.
It was plain, brutal murder. Although threats against other young inmates silenced many tongues a few boys testified. They told how this Mexican youth was repeatedly beaten unlit he began to lose his senses.
They described how the reformatory was filled with screams of this tortured youth, begging for mercy, while the guards pounded him to pieces.
They told about the solitary confinement for boys which made Alcatraz seem like a resort center. And they gave evidence that flogging was the chief “disciplinary” measure employed to teach these youth, victims of a lousy society, how to be good citizens.
Reading a transcript of this testimony is like reading the story of the Gestapo concentration camps. But this exists in California, and the victims are kids.
So far the murderers have escaped any punishment. It has taken a powerful campaign to force a hearing which is to begin next week, after continual postponements No doubt, the prison authorities in the state will seek to push the blame on the shoulders of a few minor scape-goats. And a few petty bureaucrats will be penalized one way or another in an effort to appease the liberals who raised the issue.
But nothing can erase the indictment of this society which leaves no path open to hundreds of youth except to struggle for a catch-as-catch-can existence, and then subjects them to a reign of terror, and torture, and death fof not making good in a big way and becoming respectable bankers or industrialists or – other types of thieves.
 



SANTA MONICA. Calif. – The CIO is waging an intensive 24-hour a day campaign to organize the 20,000 employees of the Douglas Aircraft Corp.
Each day, and at every shift, the CIO has distributors at the gales, passing out CIO papers, the Aircraft Organizer and special messages to the aircraft workers explaining the value and need of industrial unionism.
Soon this company will open another plant in Long Beach and bring its total employment up to 40,000 workers. It is now hiring men at the rate of 300 a week.
It was this company which broke the 1937 sit-down strike and stopped the CIO organizing drive.
We asked a worker to help us tell the story of the situation at Douglas; of the prospects of union organization. Here is how it stacks up:
“It is, I think, the general feeling that with the past experience at Vultee that a union such as the CIO would strongly help our cause,” he said.
“Certainly many of us would express that opinion openly if it were not for the fear of immediate dismissal. There are a good number of unionists in the plant so we do have a base for an organization.”
He was bitter about the huge private army that Douglas, the Henry Ford of aircraft, has to intimidate the workers.
“The Protective Police is spread out everywhere. When the CIO passes out stuff the blue-coats and the plain clothes dicks stand around. But the men take all the papers, and read them too.
“From the mighty chief Davis with his chief stooge Fitzsimons down to the lousy stool-pigeons there is always a burden upon us through fear of expulsion because of a slip of the tongue or a natural mistake which will be interpreted as espionage.
“Why should we honest working men be subjugated to such a policy? Are we all spies?
“Donald Douglas and the Chase National Bank of New York are responsible for this situation.
“With National Defense and the Espionage Act to induce fear into the minds of the workers they want to make it appear as though we must give our labor, work long hours at low pay as a gift for democracy.
“They do not mention their guaranteed 12 per cent.
“They have built us a fine arena, and given us a fine band to make us believe that these small tokens of generosity will smother our desires to advance our standard of living with better pay.”
He added sarcastically,
“Their generosity was so great that Christmas and New Year’s they gave us two days off, having us work the Saturdays previous without the customary time and a half.”
Speed-up and wages are the burning issues, according to him.
“I make more money than some guys that have been there a lot longer. We are all getting hooked.
“Many of the men try to get jobs in other plants like Vultee because there they have a union.”
How about the AFL campaign?
“They come out once in a while with their stuff. The CIO is always here. At noons when the band plays, the CIO has its sound truck going. The organizers make small speeches about unionism.
“Sure I am joining the CIO. It’s going to be a long grind. Douglas is a tough guy. But I think the CIO will win.”
 



LOS ANGELES. Mar. 23 – Labor action reminiscent of the early days of the CIO is being seen hare in California, where workers are refusing to let war profit-swollen bosses hide behind the smokescreen of “national defense’” and are demanding the right to a decent living wage.
Best example of this is in the week-old strike at the Harvill Aircraft Discasting Corp., where the workers have resisted combined onslaughts from the company, the press, the government and the police.
Every filthy tactic has already been tried, every phony demagogic appeal has been made, every dirty trick in the book has been pulled. But the CIO Association of Diecasters is apparently taking “nothing from nobody.” The strike was called to raise minimum wages from 50 to 75 cents an hour and to secure vacations and holidays with pay. seniority and grievance rights. On these issues it will be settled.
The men at Harvill hit the bricks ten days ago when Henry L. Harvill, company owner, made wage proposals of his own and refused to consider the counter-proposals of the CIO union, which was designated as bargaining agent for the plant in a Labor Board election held two months ago.
Harvill, a self-styled rugged individualist of the old school and a dictatorial tyrant if there ever was one, ran immediately to the courts for injunctions. The legal wizards and stooges provided the necessary papers and Harvill came back with every expectation of reopening his plant. He then discovered what a strike means. The boys on the picket line had ideas different from his.
On successive days. Harvill tried a red squad, which attempted to crash through the picket line; a newspaper attack, which bewailed the losses to war production (of the imperialist warmongers and the war profiteers); a red scare, mud-slinging attack, which fell flat on its face; a personal emissary from Wall Street’s Stooge No. 1 – Sidney Hillman; and an assortment of equally despicable and less effective tricks.
Never once did he try to give the union a fair hearing. A labor-hater from away back, Harvill has contemptuously refused even to meet with the negotiating committee of the union. A sample of his flimsy excuses was the plea that he couldn’t get into his own plant to get vital material necessary for negotiations. The union offered to let Harvill and five assistants into the plant and Harvill immediately found another excuse.
The only reason for the delay thus far has been Harvill’s bitter personal attitude toward the union and its members. To understand the sort of man he is it is only necessary to look back into some of the orders he issued at his own plant. Harvill told his employees, months ago, that he doesn’t like his men “fraternizing” with one another. He forbade workers who live close together from coming to work in the same car. He probably could give a few pointers to a certain Adolph Hitler!
But the Harvill workers are equally tough. In fact, 17 men and women who were discharged from the plant fur union activities have filed a half million dollar damage suit against the diecast dictator. A court hearing on Harvill’s injunction is scheduled for next Wednesday morning.
 
General Motors Strike Spreads
Up in Oakland, the General Motors strike spread to another of the company’s plants as auto workers showed that they refused to be plowed under in the company’s drive for still more profits.
Not content with the fat government orders being handed out every day, General Motors executives ordered a speed-up in the various departments. On March 10 a welder was laid off for not speeding up his work the required 10 per cent. The next morning 26 men in his department protested to the foreman. They found themselves following their fellow welder. In protest against the lockout. 1,000 men struck the Fisher Body plant.
Determined to break the strike one way or another, General Motors yesterday ordered the use of body parts from the struck plant, even though the UAW-CIO warned against this policy. Thereupon 400 workers in the General Motors truck plant, where the parts were to be used, went out on strike.
The company has tried flag-waving and “defense” scares, but this has only put them in a more ridiculous position because the union knows that the plant hasn’t made any trucks for the U.S. Army.
 
King Douglas Cracks the Whip
When the CIO won a Labor Board revote at North American Aircraft last week, this was accepted as the go-ahead signal to organize the big coast plants – Douglas and Consolidated. A single incident which occurred this week shows the magnitude of the battle ahead The CIO aircraft local at the huge Douglas plant has been maintaining an office across the street from the company. Douglas workers were signing cards, especially since the siring of CIO victories at Vultee, Ryan and North American.
A few days ago, the landlord of the building housing the CIO told the union to evacuate its office by April 1. An offer of more money or six months’ rent in advance wouldn’t change the owner’s mind. He got his orders directly frpm Donald Douglas and he had to carry them out.
Some smart apologist for capitalism will have to do a lot of talking before he can prove from this example how worker and boss are equals and can compete with each other on equal basis. King Douglas cracks the whip, the landlord jumps and the union has got to move.
There is, however, another side to this fight and that side has yet to be heard from. The workers at Douglas haven’t had their say. And we suspect Douglas’ action was motivated by a fear that will prove to have been well founded when the CIO organizes the 20,000 workers in his plant.
 
Tidal Wave of Anti-Labor Legislation
The California Legislature is having another field day with civil liberties and the rights of labor. A tidal wave of vicious legislation has flooded out of the committee rooms and it bids fair to engulf every organization in the state, down to and including the high school baseball club on the corner sand lot.
Every sort of organized group comes within the broad scope of the sweeping categories. Under one of the bills, trade unions will have to furnish membership files, names and addresses, from which a master state blacklist of all trade unionists will be made. Other weasel-worded clauses would make strikes, pickets and boycotts illegal, too.
Today California’s Stalinists find themselves in a very uncomfortable position with regard to these laws. Virtually all of them were drawn up and championed by the very people the Communist Party supported in the elections of 1938. But that was before the Stalin-Hitler pact, when the California Stalinists were literally drunk with the rewards of patriotic patronage. Now supporting the other side of the war. they find their fellow travelers – who are still patriots – aiming these new laws at them!
Unfortunately for the labor movement and the genuine anti-war elements, their suffering will go beyond “changing their line.” The Stalinists meanwhile content themselves with opposing everyone they previously supported, awaiting the next adventuristic turn of the Kremlin.
 



We were guzzling a bottle of beer with a buck private near an Army camp when a couple of officers walked in.
“Don’t have to salute them any more, outside of camp,” he told us, sighing with relief. “You’d go nuts trying to salute all of them,” he added.
And then his (ace brightened. “Say, do you know that last Saturday night a bunch of the Minnesota boys were at a joint and they had their arms around each other!”
Nobody catching the point. I asked what was so unusual about that. “The officers and the men. Two louies and some of the boys. They were singing songs together. you know, and holding themselves with their arms around each other.”
He said it like it was the seventh miracle. He still couldn’t quite believe it.
You see, he had been a National Guardsman for seven years and was properly trained as an American soldier. He had learned that officers and men don’t mix. It ain’t Kosher, as they say down South.
Officers and men. That’s two different and separate classes. None of this baloney about democracy they feed you in civil life.
And he told us more.
Army life isn’t what it used to be a few years ago. They have a million sergeants now, it seems, compared to the old days. A sergeant, and not a corporal, is in command of a squad. Superficially, the vast increases in “non-coms” looks like a “democratization” of the Army. The opposite is true. More rigid control is possible over the ranks by having a “spread” in command, by building a huge corps of sergeants between the officers and the men. It’s the three stripe boys who handle the discipline of the men. And it’s a rule that the officer always backs the sergeant against the men.
“You gotta have control of the men.” If he can’t take them out and beat the hell out of them, he’s through. One of mine didn’t last long. Behind the barracks is where they settle the question.
How about promotions? “I was a sergeant once. Got transferred and had to start all over again. An officer? Naw. I don’t want to be one. Look at all the dough they dish out in uniforms. Over $700 a year.” He was satisfied to remain in the ranks.
He was vague about the war. “If you gotta fight, you gotta fight.” He was ready. Why? He didn’t know. He was proud of his efficiency in handling machines. “Brother, you could blindfold me and I’ll take any gun apart and put it back together again in no time.” Such is Army life today.
 
Jimmy Stewart and John Nobody
Another slant on the Army is furnished by telling two incidents related to draft classification.
As most readers know, Jimmy Stewart is a Hollywood movie star. The typical American young man, good looking, a nice guy, a believer in democracy and virtue, etc., etc., etc.
Stewart drew a low draft order number. “I’m ready to serve at any time,” he told the press.
A few weeks ago, it appeared. Jimmy’s number was up. He was to be drafted. And then Major Plato, head of the California Selective Service Board, announced a temporary deferment for Stewart. “Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer asked for it.” Major Plato said.
A storm of protest followed. As one movie critic put it in his nationally syndicated column, “What’s indispensable to national defense in making love to Hedy Lamarr at $2,000 a week?” And how will the average draftee feel about that?
So 24 hours later Major Plato blandly denied that Stewart had been deferred by request, but rather he was reclassified because he was 10 pounds under weight.
Sounds plausible if you ignore the background as related here, which we hope you don’t. But even the new excuse is a flimsy one.
It happens that an Ohio acquaintance of ours out here was called for his final medical exam. A fellow who’s out here for his health.
“When you walk into the doctor’s office you know you’re near the Army. He treats you just a little better than a dog, but not much. Under other circumstances I sure would like to have smacked him one, the way he growled and snorted,” the Ohio fellow said.
But to get back to the main point. “It broke the doctor’s heart that he had to reject me. At first he thought I was only 25 pounds under weight and he was going to O.K. me, but when it was even more, he said I wouldn’t go, at least this time.”
So they’ll take a poor man who is plenty under weight but exempt a rich man like Stewart who is only slightly under weight. “I told the doctor that while I personally was indifferent to being in or out of the Army. I didn’t like the method he went about it, because of the Jimmy Stewart business. Then I was shown the door.”
 



A prominent union militant in Los Angeles made some interesting comments on the union stories and the rank and file aircraft letters in Labor Action that are worth discussing.
“I get the impression that the boys who read your paper or who support you think, that if only the Stalinists or the bureaucrats in charge of a union would be ousted, then you’d have real rank and file participation and good union meetings.
“I used to think so, too. In fact, in our own we had, as a major point against the Stalinists, the fact that they introduced so damn many resolutions that union business was never attended to, and the membership didn’t attend. And, of course, the CP was able to keep control.
“But after we finally ousted them and put in a program which I’m sure you’d say was O.K., we still had the same problem. In fact, I sometimes get disgusted with the whole business. You work and fight for the rank and file to control a union, and then they don’t pitch in with you,” he said.
Leon Trotsky made some very pertinent observations on this question a couple of years ago, in an interview with a Chicago union organizer which was published at that time in the Trotskyist press:
“More workers will participate in the union meetings if the business taken up is close to their hearts; if genuine union democracy prevails; if the workers aren’t wind-bagged to death with long speeches, etc.”
But the fact remains, and young and inexperienced unionists must bear it in mind to maintain a sense of proportion on union work, that even under the most favorable union conditions, rank and file participation never develops to the point desired by some.
In the very best days of the rubber workers’ unions in Akron, for example, a union membership meeting of 500 out of 9,000 dues paying members was considered good attendance.
On vital questions like a strike vote, about 50 per cent of the union membership would participate. This was in the days when the URWA wasn’t taking a back seat to any union in the country for militancy, rank and file participation, freedom of political expression, etc. Other unions likewise bad similar experiences.
You begin to understand this phenomenon when you see the regular union meeting as a sort of a representative assembly, as so many of the workers see it. That is, the boys who come to the Sunday meetings twice a month are usually the leaders In their department, shop stewards, militants, politically conscious elements, etc.
When the union is functioning properly in the plant through a shop steward system, the rank and file participates most decisively in the department or division meetings.
Democracy in the union movement consists, besides the usual right of criticism, speech, voice, etc., in building a union structure within the plant so that the rank and file pitches in to settle its own problems.
The proper way to get at the problem of the bureaucrats’ gag rules, etc., in union meetings, is through building the structure within the plants. The shop workers who don’t attend union meetings aren’t easy to arouse against something they don’t feel directly. But their grievances in the plant bear directly on their welfare, and they do want and will discuss them at a department meeting, demanding action. Here is where a smart union militant functions first. He becomes a leader there. This is the real union.
Experienced unionists have long said that a contract is neither good nor bad but enforcing it makes it so. A good shop steward system in the shop, fighting every inch of the way, can put teeth into a contract that the management never dreamed existed when they signed. And many a good contract became its opposite because no shop steward system was set up to follow through.
Of course, the ideal is to have the best contract and the best shop steward system. But, as people learn, there is nothing ideal in the conditions or aspects of the class struggle. You deal with the material on hand, the best you can.
Another thing, and I note this in some of the aircraft letters, in judging a union situation or a signed contract, what counts is not only what the union gets but, and sometimes this becomes decisive, what the “intangible” results are.
I mean by this the following. After the seven week Goodyear strike in 1936, the contract signed wasn’t so hot. That is, by itself it didn’t raise wages, etc., so much as one would have expected.
But that didn’t exhaust the question. The most important single gain was the development of union consciousness, of class consciousness, of arousing the spirit and determination of all Akron workers. The Goodyear boys went back, putting teeth into the contract, fighting grievance settlements, wage increases, against speed-up, etc., and in a short time had a real union.
That is why it is a fatal mistake, too frequently, indulged in by many “politicos” and unionists, to judge a strike settlement as a victory or defeat purely by what the capitalist paper said about the terms of the settlement. Often that is not enough!
This same kind of rounded out point of view is what is needed today in judging the many strikes in the country. It is what is lacking in the letter to the editor in a recent Labor Action where a headline on a story I wrote is criticized because it emphasizes that the CIO workers are on the march, rather than that the union leaders are holding the CIO workers back. (I skip the fact that a correspondent never writes the headline, or sees it beforehand. The editor does that.) What is important is that the critic falls to understand what is the vital thing to get across.
Today the vital point to make is that labor, despite all the national unity propaganda, is fighting for its rights, against bearing the cost of the war. The class struggle goes on. One must start from that decisive fact. It must be emphasized over and over again, because the capitalists are trying to conceal and suppress the struggle, and despairing souls fail to see it.
Don’t oversimplify the whole question by seeing the union movement as the rank and file straining at the leash while the bureaucrats always hold back. That is largely true, but not the whole story.
It is not true today, specifically in aircraft, the industry in which the letter-to-the-editor writer works. Aircraft workers in Southern California, to be concrete, are not union-conscious like the autoworkers, for example. It’s a job selling Unionism to them, hard work overcoming the propaganda on which they’ve been fed.
The union spirit here is something quite different from that in San Francisco, for example. Or Detroit, or Flint. It takes time, and struggle, and great struggles which burn themselves into the consciousness of the workers, to get that old do or die spirit which is perhaps the most magnificent characteristic of the American workers.
 



By one lousy vote in Congress, the boys in the army camps were sold down the river for another 18 months.
And while the politicians in Washington feel that now the world can be made safe for Wall Street’s investments, the facts are just the opposite.
For the United States Army is in an admittedly profound crisis that cannot be solved, even by a shooting war. That will merely postpone its solution temporarily.
Two-thirds of the army lacks morale, Time magazine reports. Newsweek, another weekly magazine, devotes a special article to the same problem.
The United States Army lacks what the French Army lacked: MORALE.
The problem had become so grave, even before the passage of the draft extension bill, that it had drawn the attention and discussion of the most astute capitalist apologists and defenders.
 
Several Incidents
Here art some of the “incidents” which brought this crisis to light.
The 44th Division, consisting of draftees mainly from New York and New Jersey, was reported as “unreliable” by its officers following riots and protests over the possibility of draft extension.
Newsreels of President Roosevelt and General George Marshall, Army chief of staff, were booed by Mid-Western draftees stationed in Mississippi. This was repeated in many camps, reflecting the bitterness of the soldiers against the Roosevelt regime.
Desertions are increasing, although the army refuses to give out full figures, the guardhouses are full, as revealed by the Fort Knox, Ky., shooting and killing scrape.
There are bitter protests in the letters sent back home to the folks and friends.
Above all, there is the tidal wave of protest that swept over the army camps while Congress was debating the draft extension.
Newsweek puts it in drill sergeant’s language:
“But when large numbers of soldiers violate regulations by writing their complaints to Congress, the army knows it has on its hands a major morale problem.
“Such widespread floating of regulations is intolerable to the army.”
Time magazine describes what happened in army camps when news was broadcast that the Senate had passed the bill to extend the draft and was sending it to the House.
“Around thousands of radios in thousands of tents from coast to coast angry soldiers growled: ‘Those obscenity obscenities in Washington. Obscenity the whole obscenity lot of them!’”
Time reports that
“In one National Guard division, once reputed for its high morale, soldiers carried out a special of ‘V’ campaign. They chalked up ‘Ohio’ on latrine walls and artillery pieces.”
“Ohio” means: “Over the Hill in October.”
 
Why No Morale
Some apologists attribute the lack of morale to the lack of good food, equipment, capable officers and sheer boredom. Obviously these are contributing factors. But Trotsky’s Red Army in Russia never had good food, nor good equipment. And it took a long time to build up an officers’ corps of any ability. Yet its morale was invincible.
Nor is morale the kind of problem that the U.S. Army’s morale chief. Brig. Gen. James A. Ulio, thinks it is:
“I’ll tell you what morale is. It. is when a soldier thinks his army is the best in the world, his regiment the best in the army, his company the best in the regiment, his squad the best in the company, and that he himself is the best damn soldier-man in the outfit.”
Wouldn’t life be wonderful for the reactionary brass hat clique if this wishful thinking were true? If the whole problem could be reduced to football team spirit and psychology?
The fact that the army chieftains approach the solution of the problem in this way indicates why the problem will never be solved in a capitalist army.
For high morale in any army consists essentially in that the soldiers feet and believe they are making sacrifices, Including their lives, for something worthwhile.
Given this spirit, displayed above all in the Red Army of the Lenin-Trotsky regime in Russia, questions of food, material, officers, etc., reduce themselves to proper proportion.
You’ve got to have a very good answer to the soldiers’ perennial question: “What the hell are we preparing for? Or what the hell are we fighting for?”
 
Nothing to Offer
It took Hitler ten years to build up an elite among the youth, to feed them with careful propaganda, capitalize on all the glaring stupidities of the so-called “democracies.” Combine this training in a totalitarian atmosphere with the special privileges of the Reichswehr and you understand the “secret” of the Nazi’s fanaticism.
Most of the Nazi soldiers think, at present, that they have something to fight for and against. (The high cost and strain of the Russian campaign, combined with the sudden shifts in Nazi propaganda will do much to disillusion the Nazi soldier.) But how can Roosevelt sell the American soldiers a bill of goods? A war for democracy when the soldiers’ democratic rights are being crushed? With more “discipline” to come!
An eight-point program for world peace which at best is a warmed-over rehash of Wilson’s stale 14 points!
A program to bring peace and prosperity for the folks back home, when all the letters from home complain about the high cost of living, the insecurity, and the dread of a post-war depression?
Morale consists of giving the soldiers something really worth training and fighting for. But this is precisely what is impossible for the Roosevelt imperialist regime.
In the last World War, the problem of morale became urgent after three years of slaughter. In the American Army it has arisen BEFORE the shooting war, BEFORE the tremendous casualties.
 



LOS ANGELES – A wave of 22 strikes swept through this city in the past two weeks, highlighted by the walkout of 3,200 members of the International Ladies Garment Workers.
Eighteen of the strikes quickly brought at least partial victories for the workers involved.
Fifty thousand aircraft workers here expect to obtain higher wages and much better conditions, soon as a result of the North American Aviation strike victory that achieved a 75 cent minimum and a ten per cent general pay raise.
While the North American victory served as an inspiration, behind this fresh wave of strikes is an even more potent force: the skyrocketing rise in the cost of living.
 
Discontent Deep
How deep-seated the discontent has become is shown by the ILGWU strike where the workers, after remaining dormant for a long-time under the burden of a bureaucratic leadership, have rallied into militant action.
Downtown Los Angeles gives an impression of a general strike going on, since every street corner is dotted with picket signs. In the garment center, mass picket lines hold sway. Minor skirmishes with scabs added zest to the militancy of the ILGWU strikers while nearby 500 employees of the Owl Drug Stores paced up and down in front of the many chain stores located downtown.
And there is the threat of 1,900 workers at the Aluminum Corporation of America plant here to strike under the CIO banner unless the company comes through with a real contract – signed, sealed and delivered.
 
On to Union Town
Each strike or threatened strike serves to expose the horrible conditions for employees in this once open-shop center.
The wage-hour division of the U.S. Department of Labor issued a blast against the garment manufacturers for violating the low minimums set up under the law.
Many of the women employees are working for $12 and $14 a week in the sweatshops here, when the law provides for at least a miserable $16 weekly. And the hours are long, six days a week. The ILGWU is demanding a 15 to 20 percent wage increase for unionized shops. It is also trying to organize many non-union shops, especially in sportswear, which employs 5,000 workers. Failure of the ILGWU top leadership to create a real strike organization jeopardizes the possibility of winning a total victory.
An important factor aiding these strikers and other workers is that the war boom has created enough of a competition for labor among the bosses. Raiding between plants, promises of higher wages, etc., are used to, get workers.
Los Angeles is moving rapidly toward becoming a union town.
 



LOS ANGELES – The International Ladies Garment Workers Union here made big inroads into the sweatshops manufacturing sportswear through the militancy of its striking workers during the past week.
In addition, the dressmakers won a 15 per cent wage increase following their brief strike which began simultaneously with the sportswear walk-out. Union contracts, of course were signed again.
Over 21 shops were brought under union contract in the sportswear division during the week, when employers realized that the militant demonstrations, featuring mass picket lines, meant business.
Skirmishes on the picket line brought six false arrests as cops interfered in an effort to intimidate the strikers. Rose Pesotta, international vice-president of the ILGWU, was arrested twice in one day along with five workers, including Edith Mann, special union organizer.
The union contract includes a 5 per cent wage increase and other regular union provisions. It is the first time that this section of the clothing industry here has been organized and put under union contract.
Hundreds of workers are in the union and under contract conditions now, were previously unorganized and in open shops.
The issuance of strike benefits over the week-end brought new courage to the strikers and increased the determination to win in as many of the remaining shops as possible.
Since there are around 40 shops scattered through the city which still remain unorganized or have only a few workers on strike, a big job lies ahead for the union.
Consolidating the newly-organized workers into the union and putting teeth into the contracts looms as a vital task for the union.
However, a solid foundation now exists for full union victory over a period of time because of the tremendous steps forward resulting from the present strike.
 



The strike called this week at the Toronto, Canada, plant of the Seiberling Rubber Co., marks the climax of a series of struggles of rubber workers in that area.
Premier Hepburn has made a notorious reputation for himself as a C.I.O. baiter. His strike-breaking activities make him a rival of Tom Girdler.
In the face of this situation, the United Rubber Workers of America has been organizing Canadian plants, and the rubber workers have been calling strikes and winning them this spring.
Local 118 of the U.R.W.A. struck for wage increases, seniority rights, stabilized working hours, collective bargaining rights and a signed contract. The wage demand calls for a 10 percent increase for employees earning more than 60 cents an hour now, and 15 per cent for those making less than 60 cents hourly. The plant employs 150 men of whom 125 already are on the picket line, union leaders said.
 
Victory Expected
Settlement of the strike of 750 rubber workers at the Kitchener, Ont., plant of the B.F. Goodrich Co. was expected this week with indications that the strikers would win major concessions.
The Goodrich strike began in the shoe department where the workers demanded a 3.2 cents per hour increase and were turned down by company officials. They walked out and soon were joined by the rest of the employees and a full strike was called.
Two prolonged strikes in February and March were won by Locals 67 and 68, U.R.W.A. at the Dominion Tire and the Merchants Rubber Co.
Signed agreements containing sweeping concessions for the rubber workers ended those strikes. An arbitration committee was selected to adjust the wage increase demand. It is headed by Prof. Norman MacKenzie of the University of Toronto. An hourly increase of five cents was asked by the strikers. The report of the arbitration committee is also expected to announce its decision soon.
Organization in the Goodyear and Firestone plants in Canada has been coming along fairly well. All in all, the Canadian rubber workers at present are doing the sort of job that the Akron rubber workers did in 1936-37.
Importance of these successes is three-fold: The C.I.O. is obtaining a firmer base in Canada, the United Rubber Workers of America is boosting wage levels outside of Akron and thereby putting a damper on decentralization to some extent, and Labor is realizing that union struggles can be won irrespective of reactionary political regimes controlling the government.
The militancy of the Canadian rubber workers is explained by the conditions under which they work. Wages are way below Akron levels for the same work Akron workers do. Hours are much longer, shop conditions intolerable, and the speed-up limitless.
* * *
Good News
Good news came this week from the Oklahoma labor front. A jury returned a not guilty verdict for 93 oil strikers at Tulsa on charges of unlawful assemblage.
It was a big blow to the companies which have been trying to break the picket line maintained for over six months by the Oil Workers International Union.
It put a crimp in the company plans to railroad Jack Hays, local president, and 36 militant unionists on charges of conspiracy, as revealed in previous issues of the Socialist Appeal.
The present victory of the oil workers was hardly expected by the prosecutor, who went into a veritable rage when the jury announced its acquittal by a nine to three vote. The trial of Hays and the 36 unionists will have a different kind of background than the oil companies and its stooges in the county administration expected.
 



Testimony of the Goodyear officials before the National Labor Relations Board in hearings going on at Akron produced a powerful boomerang this week that sent the company reeling from the blow.
The company officials claimed, in their testimony, that they had negotiated and bargained with Local 2, United Rubber Workers of America, and their smooth talk seemed to have an effect in the hearings.
However, Goodyear Local, over the week end, passed a resolution calling on the company to negotiate for a signed agreement immediately, in view of the policy that its officials outlined at the N.L.R.B. hearings.
Company lawyers professed to the belief in collective bargaining when this resolution was introduced in the hearing. So a suggestion was made by union officials that the hearings be postponed while negotiations were carried on. “The company has denied charges that it refused to negotiate,” Stanley Denlinger, union attorney declared. “The union resolution asks the company to show proof of its willingness to sit down and bargain.”
Refusal of the company to permit a recess in the hearings to enter negotiations with the U.R.W.A. exposed testimony of witnesses as lies and frauds, and proved the union charges against Goodyear.
* * *
Guild Contracts
A reader asks for information on the kind of contracts the American Newspaper Guild obtains for editorial workers. A brief digest of a contract just signed between the Guild and the Philadelphia Evening Bulletin will answer this question.
Minimum wages under the Guild contract are: experienced rewrite men, $65 a week, copy readers, !$65, reporters, $55, district reporters, $50, photographers and artists, $50, copy boys $18 after one year experience. These rates are for journeymen. During the first three years of work, a graduated scale of wages applies. Night men get $5 a week more than day men on similar jobs.
An important section of any guild contract is dismissal pay. In this contract it is provided that dismissal pay for anyone employed more than 6 months and less than a year amounts to two weeks salary. The scale goes up until a man with ten years service is guaranteed six months dismissal pay. Sick leave pay is also provided for.
The agreement provides for the five-day-40-hour week with standard overtime provisions.
* * *
Wages and Hours
Another query is for information on wages and hours in certain major industries. The following is presented from the Labor Information Bulletin of the United States Department of Labor, May issue.

Weekly hours: 38 in the foundry and machine shops; 37 in sawmills; 36 in brick manufacturing; 34.5 in blast furnaces and rolling mills; 33.5 in auto.
 
Hourly earnings: 92.5 cents in auto; 83.5 in blast furnaces and rolling mills; 71.5 in foundries and machine shops; 54.5 in brick manufacturing; 53.5 in sawmills.
 
Weekly earnings: $31.10 in auto; $28.80 in blast furnaces and rolling mills; $27.00 in foundries; $19.60 in brick manufacturing, and $19.35 in sawmills.

In another classification of industry, namely the non-durable goods, we have the following wages and hours:

Hours weekly: 40 in paper and pulp; 40 in packinghouse; 36.5 in cotton goods manufacturing; 36.5 in petroleum refining; 34 in tire and tube plants and divisions.
 
Hourly earnings: 97.5 cents in petroleum; 96 in tires and tubes; 69 in packinghouse; 61.5 in paper and pulp; 38.5 in cotton goods.
 
Weekly earnings: $35.15 in petroleum; $32.65 in tires and tubes; $27.30 in packinghouse; $24.45 in paper and pulp, and $14.05 in cotton goods.

 



Surprisingly little attention was paid in the press to the semi-annual meeting of the C.I.O. executive council in Washington, D.C., last week. Surprising because it reflected a serious underestimation of the C.I.O.
The attitude of John L. Lewis on the question of unity with the A.F.L. flows from a resurgence of the C.I.O. movement. The victory of the United Mine Workers of America in the nation-wide strike solved satisfactorily the acutest crisis of the C.I.O. movement.
The Briggs auto strike victory gave further impetus to the growth of confidence in the industrial union movement.
Encouraged by these developments, top C.I.O. leaders are returning to their forgotten perspective of building a C.I.O. movement so powerful and large that it would simply engulf the A.F.L.
That is why Lewis declared there could not be peace with the A.F.L. at the present time and with its present leadership. Unless unity came on C.I.O. terms, Lewis feels that the basic need of organizing millions of unorganized workers into industrial unions would suffer. Certainly the entire record of the A.F.L. bureaucracy testifies to the charge that they would impede any such organization drive.
 
What Will Happen?
Often in the New International and the Socialist Appeal we have written that it was a great tragedy to the American labor movement that the C.I.O. did not continue to advance and become the dominant and decisive stream of the labor movement, forcing the A.F.L. to submerge itself into the new movement which had industrial workers as its basis.
A victory over the A.F.L. would even now have this effect, although at a much greater cost.
Whether the C.I.O. proposal to remain independent of the A.F.L. is progressive or not, depends primarily on the kind of program it follows as a separate organization.
A continued organization drive, concentrating especially on the South, is vitally needed in America. Hints of independent political action, if carried out, would be a major step forward for the C.I.O.
What will happen on these two questions remains to be seen. But there is one thing which we happen to know the C.I.O. leadership is contemplating that definitely would not be progressive in character.
The C.I.O. is weighing the possibility, very seriously, of entering the building trades field as a rival of the A.F.L. Certain trusted lieutenants of Lewis are surveying the field. In some places, cautious attempts to sign up building trades members were made, but action of local progressive unionists squelched this tendency.
A jurisdictional war, and it would be a plenty bloody and bitter war, between the C.I.O. and the A.F.L. could and would create the worst sort of havoc. It would open the flood gates for more repressive legislation against the labor movement.
We know of a dozen important labor centers where there is a good working agreement between the C.I.O. and the A.F.L. Both sides benefit immensely from the united front they can present against the employers.
If the C.I.O. invades the building trades field, these united fronts would be broken in a minute. Bitter warfare, goon squads, crashing of picket lines, slugfests would result among union men who now work together against their common enemy, the bosses.
This would not be a question of industrial versus craft unions. The C.I.O. would be forced to organize craft unions.
The proper tactic, in our opinion, is for the C.I.O. to help the progressives within the building trades by showing in action what a progressive program for labor can do.
It is as fatal for the C.I.O. leaders to think that the A.F.L. can be smashed as it has been for the A.F.L. leaders to hold that opinion of the C.I.O.
 



The United Progressive Furriers of New York recently put the Stalinist administration of the International Fur Workers Union on the spot with an open letter to Ben Gold, Stalinist president of the international.
“We are approaching already the middle of June but thousands of us are still crowding the sidewalks of the fur market – hungry, tired and worried.” the letter points out.
“The convention of our union in Atlantic City had the task of solving partly these problems, but the leadership of the Joint Council forgot all about the sufferings of the fur workers,” the letter accuses. It continues:
“You, Mr. President, have contributed a great deal towards this present condition by stirring up one part of the workers against another. Since you came back from the convention a whole set of schemes and maneuvers. were put into motion in order to whip the workers in line again.”
“You were convinced through the open forums that the unemployed mean business, and have therefore advised the leadership of the Joint Council to, rush through the convention decisions at the local meetings. You made your plan so that only few workers should attend local meetings.”
 
Silence Critics
“Never in the history of our union were there any kind of meetings held on holidays. Will you please tell us Mr. President, why all the four local meetings were held on the two nights of the Jewish holiday, ‘Shevuoth?’ ... Can you tell us why the largest local of our joint council, the Operators, with a membership of nearly 5,000 was assigned to meet in a hall that takes only about 300? Doesn’t that prove that you were not interested to have the furriers make an honest decision?”
“At the local meetings we found out that one of your decisions at the convention is to silence those who dare criticize you and your friends. You call it ‘democratization of the constitution.’ You want everyone in our union to bow to the bureaucracy. You want us to close our eyes and shut our mouths to the so-called victory of temporary jobs, permits for learners, permits for overtime, inhuman speed-up, clique rule in the shop, party domination in the union, dishonest elections, squandering of union money, collaboration with the bosses to the extent of obtaining thousands of dollars in loans from them.”
“That is what you call democracy. But tell us please, Mr. President, if you were a rank and filer today, would you also tolerate such conditions and accept in good faith such convention decisions?”
“Please be honest about it, Mr. President, you know that the workers are dissatisfied with the leadership in the Joint Council. You know that people in the labor movement have no use for totalitarian regimes even though they are covered by so-called united fronts such as you claim to have in our union. Aren’t you ashamed to speak of rues and constitutions, when the entire history of your fight for power has shown a sneering attitude and full disregard for the union’s constitution?
“You have spoken at the local meeting of the cutters. You lumped and cursed everyone that disagreed with you, but you must admit you met with no success ... Then your lieutenants tried hard to follow the footsteps of the ‘Leader’. They even tried to outdo you in demagogy, but the result was the same.”
“Of course we admit one thing. You people know the game – you dragged out the meetings with meaningless speeches until the majority of those present left in disgust. Then with your own boys left, you were able to take a ‘peoples’ vote and pass all decisions ‘overwhelmingly’ with a few hundred votes from all of the four locals for the entire membership of 15,000. Is this democracy?”
 
Why No Referendum?
“But what about our proposal to put the convention decisions to a referendum? Don’t you think, Mr. President, that such important decisions as elections once in two years to which the membership obligates itself to provide people with two years’ pay and vacations, and the boarding of the leatherworkers in the house of the fur workers which will involve us in new expenses with possible jurisdictional friction in the future. And last but not least, the silencing of the critics. That all these are important enough to be decided by all the fur workers and not by a handful of those present at the local meetings?”
 



Long-Haired Boys
That this country needs a good five-cent cigar and glass of beer to make union leaders reasonable, evidently is the assumption upon which the American Economic Foundation, a super-super union-busting organization, is founded.
The purpose of this outfit is to pour oil on the troubled waters of the class struggle, to bring peace and quiet and normalcy back to communities which have been torn by labor trouble and “to restore workers’ faith in the capitalistic system.”
Now there is nothing new about this faith-healing. Joe Hill, who immortalized in song the militancy of the American workers, once wrote about “long haired preachers” who promise “pie in the sky” – to which Joe thundered “that’s a lie!”
What is interesting is that the faith-healers and economic medicine men should employ their methods of gentle suasion in an age when the class struggle is more and more being waged in the streets and not in a labor-management conference over some nickle stogies.
 
In the Backroom
The American Economic Foundation chose three American cities in which to conduct their experiment – Terre Haute, Indiana, Massilon and Akron, Ohio.
Its methods are simple, almost insulting to one’s finer sensibilities. In Terre Haute, scene of general strikes, pitched battles between the workers and the state militia and seething cauldron of the class struggle, the bosses found that much of their trouble could be eliminated by being “nice” to the labor leaders. Instead of calling in the militia, they called in certain union officials. They retired to Mike’s bar, and over a couple of beers and cigars, the dispute was settled.
Fortune magazine, which records these touching incidents, fails to say how the rank and file is faring in this new era.
 
Billy Sunday of Business
The Foundation has now moved in on Akron in the person of one, Alfred Haake, Ph.D. and one-time official of the American Liberty League.
At the moment, he is conducting his moral rearmament program through the various luncheon clubs and American Legion, the latter of which has been in ill repute since the Socialist Workers Party in Akron held a counter-demonstration to one of its flag-waving rallies.
One of Dr. Haake’s buddies on-the-firing-line is Deloss Walker, associate editor of Liberty magazine and self-christened “Billy Sunday of Business.” In a former Akron appearance, Walker jumped on a table, threw off his coat and threatened to bust anyone in the jaw who said he couldn’t get a job. (He must embarrass the bourgeoisie.)
In Massilon, where the little-steel strike was fought to a bloody finish, the Foundation has set the milk and honey of class collaboration flowing by bringing certain union officials into the “civic organizations.”
 
Junk Pile, or Else
No worker, of course, can object to creating better cities to live in or to bringing about prosperity. But that can be done only by obtaining a higher standard of living for the laboring masses – by jobs at decent wages. On this problem, the American Economic Foundation is understandably silent.
Capitalism has shown itself incapable of improving the lot of the common people. Our lot, instead, is getting worse. And everyone is realizing it more and more.
And this is where the baloney salesmen come in with their slightly adulterated tripe. They will fail in restoring our faith in their skin-game.
Their outfit must either end in the junk pile with all those that came before it or develop into an open, undisguised strike-breaking, union-busting gang, which it is at heart.
 



The Ohio Federation of Teachers, affiliated with the A.F. of L., recently held its state convention. In contrast to other localities, the Ohio Federation reported considerable organizational progress.
M.J. Ecke, Secretary-Treasurer of the Ohio Federation, reported that the past year was the most successful year of the Federation since its organization in 1934.
Gains were made in membership, affiliation of new locals with the Federation and the organization of new locals in the state of Ohio. Then new locals were organized in the past year, bringing the total to twenty-six for the state, of which eighteen are affiliated with the state organization.
Despite undisguised pressure of Ohio State Federation of Labor officials, the convention went on record against any changes in the Wagner Act.
One state official openly told delegates, “If you don’t go along with us (amend the Wagner Act) we’ll withdraw support from your organization.” After a motion to table the resolution defending the Wagner Act was defeated 19 to 61, the convention voted 68 to 13 to oppose any amendments to the Wagner Act.
 
For Labor Unity
A call to the national A.F. of L. to submit a national referendum on the question of unity between the C.I.O. and the A.F. of L. was also made by the convention.
The referendum would be on two questions:
“Shall a department for industrial unionism be set up within the A.F. of L.”
“Shall all bona-fide labor unions, not now affiliated, be invited to affiliate with the A.F. of L., on exactly the same terms, and to enjoy the same rights, benefits and cooperation in the Federation as the unions now members of the same.”
A blast at all the anti-alien bills pending before Congress was made in a special resolution which condemned the vicious persecution of minorities embodied in those bills.
All Stalinist-supported candidates lost in the elections. E. Glenn Baxter of Elyria was chosen president, George Hammersmith of Toledo, vice president, Eugenia Couden of Cleveland, recording secretary, and Paul Parker of Springfield, sergeant of arms. Ecke was re-elected to his post of secretary-treasurer.
 
Trainmen Meet
Another convention in Ohio has a different character – the quadrennial convention of the Brotherhood of Railway Trainmen. While thousands of railroad workers are walking the streets, 975 delegates are leisurely going through a convention that is expected to last at least two months!
What a convention! All sessions are closed. Anyone talking to a newspaperman is subject to expulsion. But despite these steps to keep absolute silence over his moves, President A.F. Whitney is having a little trouble.
There seems to have been a falling out between Whitney and George Anderson, secretary-treasurer. Anderson published a small pamphlet, charging the Whitney administration with exorbitant expenditure of union funds. He claims that expenditures increased $990,000 during the past ten years, compared to a previous period. He also said that a close friend of Whitney’s who handles the union insurance business, got nearly half a million dollars in commissions.
When part of this pamphlet was reprinted by a Cleveland newspaper, Whitney, instead of replying to the accusations, threatened to take the convention to another city where the press would be more favorably inclined to him.
Later on Whitney declared that the increase in the union revenue by $10,000,000 in the past ten years justified the increased expenditures because the union had grown from 57,000 to 123,000.
Whitney can scarcely blame the rank and file of his union for being very suspicious of any explanations in view of the dictatorial control he holds over the convention and its proceedings. Anderson, for example, got the axe because of his opposition to Whitney.
 



Threat of a strike by the powerful teamsters union in Cleveland, O., this week swiftly brought employers to their knees and won considerable concessions for the truck drivers in a signed two-year contract.
The new agreement provides for a five-cent hourly wage increase, effective immediately, for nearly 3,500 union truck drivers and loading dock workers. It provides for a 48-hour work week, with a three-hour leeway in case of necessity, making maximum hours 51 per week.
Under the new wage scale loading dock workers will get 67½ cents an hour and helpers 62½ cents an hour. Drivers of ordinary cartage trucks will receive 80 cents an hour, while drivers of the truck and trailer outfits used in local hauling will receive 88 cents an hour. Heavy machinery drivers will get 95 cents an hour.
 
Crack Boss Unity
But Local 407 of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters of which Ed Murphy, powerful Cleveland labor leader, is president, broke the employers’ united front by reaching an agreement with the Cleveland group of Certified and Permit Motor Carriers, an organization composed mainly of long-distance haulers. The Cleveland Draymen’s Employers Association knuckled under following this development.
Murphy announced that representatives of all truck drivers unions in the state engaged in long distance hauling would meet this week in Columbus, O., to formulate a state-wide contract for the over-the-road haulers.
The Cleveland contract is another impressive step forward of the Teamsters Union in the mid-west area.
 
Clay Workers
The United Brick and Clay Workers Union, affiliated to the American Federation of Labor, announced in Canton, O., this week that it had obtained a one-year contract with 32 clay products plants in Ohio, Pennsylvania and Indiana.
It was a compromise agreement calling for a continuation of the present 58 cents an hour basic rate of pay and the 40-hour week. The union had asked for a 12 per cent pay increase while the employers demanded a 10 per cent reduction.
The clay industry was the scene of long and bitter strike struggles especially from 1934 to 1937 in this area. One of the chief objectives of the union during that time was to obtain an area pact. It has succeeded.
* * *
Spontaneous action by fifty W.P.A. workers on a project in Youngstown brought expected results. The men stormed into W.P.A. offices demanding that an order to drop their project be rescinded.
The men won their demand and decided to form a permanent organization of W.P.A. and unemployed workers to protect their interests. It has been named the Federal Workers Union. Shop steward systems were set up on various projects and over 1,000 workers enrolled. All this has happened in little over a month. A few militant unionists did this good work. It shows what can be done.
 
Drivers Celebrate
Akron truck drivers are soon to celebrate the sixth anniversary of the formation of their union. Dan Tobin, International President of the Brotherhood of Teamsters, is scheduled to speak.
Local 348, which is sponsoring the celebration, has something worth talking about. Besides reducing hours from as high as 100 a week for over-the-road drivers down to 60, and from 70 and 80 to 40 for local drivers, the union has raised wages from 25 to 100%. With all but two firms vacations with pay are in signed contracts.
Milk drivers, coal drivers, bakery drivers and newspaper drivers have been organized and given separate local charters. Local 348 still has over 2,000 dues paying members left. It has aided the United Rubber Workers Union in situations like the Goodyear strike last year.
 



We know some unemployed railroad workers in Astoria, New York, who will be especially interested in the following item we picked up in Cleveland, Ohio, this week.
The convention of the Brotherhood of Railroad Trainmen is still going on. Its cost is now nearly $1,000,000. By the time the convention adjourns, over one million bucks will have been used from the union treasury for convention expenses! That’s more dough than the C.I.O. used to organize the auto industry!
 
Set-Back for Whitney
By the way, President A.P. Whitney took some severe setbacks at this convention. George W. Anderson, secretary-treasurer, who blasted the extravagance of the Whitney regime as reported previously in the Socialist Appeal, was re elected to his post.
Whitney defeated Charles H. Smith for presidency. He was shocked to find opposition to his office. Whitney’s attempt to get Smith defeated subsequently for the position of vice-president which he had held, was unsuccessful. J.A. Farquharson, editor of the Railroad Trainmen and national legislative representative of the brotherhood, another Whitney opponent, was also re-elected.
The climax in many respects came when 300 anti-Whitney delegates held a special dinner and dance to honor opposition leaders this week.
Whitney’s attempt to achieve dictatorial control of the Brotherhood has collapsed. Unfortunately, the opposition is no more progressive on most issues than Whitney. The worst aspect of the railroad unions is the huge bureaucracy set up which eats the finances of the unions and weighs them down into impotency. This convention illustrates the fact strikingly.
 
Technological Progress
An idea of what technological development and subsequent unemployment mean to a worker was furnished by a tire builder who reports the following:
“Ten years ago I used to make 28 special size tires in a day’s work. I was making 56 of the same tires until recently. They had improved the machine and figured out in time-studies how to save operations that increased my work to the 56 tires.
“Now I am scheduled to make 180 of these tires in six hours with a new tire-building machine they are setting up! And this is in six hours! My pay isn’t any higher than it was ten years ago! Of course, installing this new machinery will mean that one tire builder can do the work of three. What happens to them? They can’t even get on W.P.A. anymore.”
Incidentally, this tirebuilder isn’t interested in the slogan 30–30 for himself. He makes more than $30 a week for a 30 hour week. What he wants to know is what can be done and how can it be done so that he gets the benefit of his increased work.
While there is a lingering resentment against the introduction of new machinery, most workers show their resentment against the right place, the bosses. The job of the union is te fight for the benefits that company gets from the new machinery. Much higher pay and much lower hours is the way to squeeze the benefit from the bosses.
 



With lengthy negotiations over a period of five months dragging into a state of ineffectiveness, the Teamsters’ Unions in Ohio felt forced this week to set an absolute deadline for final acceptances or rejection of their proposed contract by employing truckers in this area, Edward Murphy, international representative of the union, announced.
Action in establishing the deadline of June 17 was taken by the Ohio Highway Driver Council at a special meeting held last week in Columbus, O., attended by union representatives from all parts of the state.
Speaking for the council, Murphy stressed the fact that the proposed contract was in line with other wage agreements for the same type of employment in other sections of the country through which the same companies operate, and that further delays would be unreasonable.
The proposed contract in no way varies from other similar agreements and there is no real reason why the employers should not sign it, Murphy added.
 
Terms of Contract
Demands made upon the employers are only that a pay rate of approximately 75 cents an hour be established; pay for over-the-road drivers is to be based on a mileage basis of 3½ cents per mile for single units, and 4½ cents a mile on double units, and the straight 75 cent per hour rate is only paid when the trucks are halted for checking, spotting, breakdowns, etc.
However, Murphy points out, a single unit driver would have to average 22 miles per hour to receive 75 cents under the “rolling” rate – a difficult task with the huge single and double trailer outfits.
Where the driver owns his own equipment, the proposed agreement sets forth that in addition to the amount he receives for operating this equipment, he also be paid at the union rate.
It seeks to guarantee that all drivers be permitted one off day in every seven days and that no driver be called upon to work more than 60 hours in any one week period, according to Murphy. Establishment of seniority rights is included in the terms.
Around 30,000 truck drivers in Ohio were represented in the Council through representatives of their unions when the contract was proposed and the deadline set.
Among the prominent Ohio truck drivers officials present at the council meeting were: Paul Lave, secretary and business agent Akron Local 348; B.V. McGriff, business agent of Cleveland Local 407, who is also president of the Ohio Highway Drivers Council; Harry Card, business agent of Toledo Local 20, who is secretary of the Council; and the following members of the Council’s executive board which includes Lave, David T. Finn, business agent of Dayton Local 957; Leonard Newmaker, president of the Columbus Local 413; Sam Butcher, business agent of Cincinnatti Local 100, and Thomas Oakes, business agent of Canton Local 92, and president of the Canton Federation of Labor.
In general this development follows along the lines of the Over-the-Road contracts which were negotiated in the nine-state area during the past year under the direction of a special Teamsters’ committee set up in that section of the country with official sanction of the International Union.
* * *
On Labor Spies
Unionists throughout the country should pay the closest attention to the latest public findings of the LaFollette Civil Liberties Committee which were released on June 11. They concern spies in labor organizations.
A prominent member of Goodrich Local, United Rubber Workers of America, was accused in the report of being an agent of the Corporation’s Auxiliary Company of Cleveland.
He is John Grisby and has denied being a spy.
Conclusive evidence was introduced, however, that Percy Booth, former corresponding secretary of the Akron Central Labor Union, an officer in the Machinists Union, and later very active in Goodyear Local, U.R.W.A., was on the payroll of the spy agency. Booth is reported being in California now.
William O’Neil, former president, business agent and onetime secretary of the A.F. of L. Retail Clerks Union was also named. He skipped town two years ago with a large sum of union funds and went to Pennsylvania.
H.D. Hanna, prominent in the Diamond Match Local Union and in the Barberton Central Labor Union was declared to be a paid spy. He is reported to be in Michigan now.
In listing the spies active in the Akron area, the LaFollette report says they are based on a confession of the chief director of the Corporation’s Auxiliary, and the names are taken from the 1935 payroll of the company.
 



The July issue of the Steel Workers Organizer, voice of the Northern New Jersey Steel Workers. Council (C.I.O.), carries a good editorial on the problems of the steel workers because of technological unemployment, and what can be done. It says:
“Machines and Men”
Recently the Irvin continuous strip mill of Carnegie-Illinois rolled 466 tons of tin plate in eight hours with a crew of six men – a new record.
We asked John Grajciar, of the S.W.O.C. in Warren, Ohio, an expert on tin mills, to give us a comparison of this record with the old hand mills, in terms of men. His findings are interesting in light of the problem of “machines and men.” Mr. Grajciar writes:

“I took a little time and just roughly figured it out in comparison with the three and four part tin mills of the Republic Steel Corporation at Warren, Ohio, and here are the approximate figures:
“The Irvin mill had a crew of six men on its cold reduction unit. In addition, I would judge, there were not more than forty men employed on the hot continuous mill that reduces the slab of hot strip for a further reduction into tin plate on the cold reduction. This gives a total of 56 men. Their output in eight hours was 447 tons, a record.
“Assuming that each of the men averaged $10 a day, which is a very liberal estimate, the total wage bill for the Carnegie-Illinois company was $560 to produce 447 tons of tin plate.
“On a three-part hand tin mill of the Republic Steel to produce an equivalent tonnage, it would require 74 crews with nine men on a crew. In addition, there would be fifty shearmen and approximately 100 openers. This makes a total of 816 men, or an approximate wage cost of $10,740.
“On a four-part hand tin mill, 447 tons would require 88 crews of nine men each, plus 50 shearmen and 100 openers. This amounts to 942 men at an approximate payroll of $12,240.
“In other words, the new strip mill with 56 men can produce 447 tons at a wage cost of $560, or a wage cost of $1.25 a ton. While on a three-part hand mill 816 men are required to produce 447 tons at a wage cost of $10,740, or $24 a ton; and, even worse, the labor cost per ton on the four-part hand tin mill is $27.30.
“There is little wonder that this country is in such difficult economic times, because none of this saving has been passed on to the consumer, because tin plate is selling for $3 a short ton more today than two years ago. And, furthermore, more than one-half the tin plate that is produced in America is produced on the continuous strip mills.”
 

Steel Council Answers
The answer to this problem was given by the Steel Council last month and in the second issue of the Organizer. The delegates that met in Erie, Pa., last month joined our national parade when they adopted resolutions for the 6-hour day and the 30-hour week at the base pay rate of $1.00 hourly for steel workers.
It is the duty of the S.W.O.C. to solve the terrible effects of unemployment caused by modern labor displacing machinery. Negotiations with Big Steel must contain the demands for a reduction in hours with no reduction in the weekly pay. Make America’s Sixty Families pay.
 



Three good union men were killed in Harlan, Kentucky, during the last week. Two of them were shot by National Guardsmen. One of them was killed by a scab over the weekend.
Three union men dead. What was their crime? They were only defending their inalienable right to organize, to obtain collective bargaining.
In its strike-breaking activities the National Guard was not satisfied, however, with merely trying to terrorize the Harlan miners by threat of armed force. The Guardsmen used force.
Resentment among the miners, already plenty high because of the presence of the National Guard, reached a breaking point after the shootings.
So what did the Guard do? It rounded up 246 active strikers and their wives and packed them into an over-crowded jail.
 
Guilty of What?
What was the charge? “Banding and confederating.” Phoney from the first letter to the last. A family eating dinner is “banding and confederating” to eat food. A Sunday school is “baading and confederating” to observe religious exercises.
In so many words, the “Crime” of the Harlan miners, according to the” National Guard mentality, was getting together and striking.
The charges against the 246 miners and their wives are pure and simple frame-ups. A desperate move to use “Legal” terror against the solid ranks of the strikers. Bail was put at $257,000 in an effort to keep the strikers in jail and try to break their morale.
It’s the same dirty stunt the National Guard always uses to break strikes. They tried it on the auto workers in Anderson, Ind., when we were there during the General Motors strike.
It served to expose the National Guard to many wavering elements. It forged an iron ring of solidarity among the workers. In Harlan, the result will be the same.
A national campaign of the C.I.O. to free the Harlan miners must begin immediately. The three martyrs among the Harlan strikers can be avenged in only one way. The open shop must be smashed. The United Mine Workers should continue its drive until a closed shop and good union conditions prevail in Harlan, Kentucky.
Perhaps John L. Lewis spoke of the Harlan miners in his Chicago speech Sunday and the press failed to mention it. He should have made it such a big point that omission was impossible.
The Harlan victims should be honored by the C.I.O. with the same reverence as the murdered Workers of the Chicago Little Steel massacre.
Honor them by fighting against the oppressors who caused their death. And John L. Lewis hardly looked like a fighter or union leader when his only action after the Harlan killings was to write a letter to Frank Murphy, Attorney General demanding protection ... at a time when Murphy was doing his best to break the W.P.A. workers’ strike against starvation wages.
* * *
Green Fails
After all these years of the A.F.L.-C.I.O. dispute, William Green, president of the A.F.L., couldn’t split the Salem, Mass. labor movement despite the strenuous efforts on his part.
The current issue of the North Shore Organizer, newspaper of the Lynn, Peabody, and Salem, Mass., C.I.O. movement tells the story of how Green’s orders to expel C.I.O. unions from the Central labor movement failed completely in the past.
His personal agent, Aaron Vellman appeared at the last meeting and demanded expulsion of the C.I.O. unions or else the charter would be lifted. The body fought unanimously against this tactic but in the end the purge was carried out, although in a different fashion than Green would have liked.
The C.I.O, unions called a recess and met by themselves. They returned shortly and announced that to avoid the A.F.L. unions losing their charter by disobeying Green, the C.I.O. unions would withdraw, but that unity would not be broken.
“We’ll find organizational means of working together,” the spokesman of the C.I.O. declared.
 



Major concentration point of the C.I.O. organization work in the next period is the packing house industry.
This was emphasized last week by John L. Lewis, speaking in Chicago, home of the “Big Four” packers, Armour, Swift, Wilson and Cudahy.
There is a twofold aim in the C.I.O. concentration on this industry. One is organizational; the C.I.O. wants a real base in Chicago and this industry. The other is political; the C.I.O. wants a powerful weapon to assist it in winning the farmers’ support to the aims of the C.I.O.
 
Terrible Conditions
Few industries in America have the notorious reputation for terrible working conditions as the packing houses, especially in the Chicago area. Many years ago Upton Sinclair achieved international fame with his devastating expose of these conditions in his novel, The Jungle. They haven’t changed much.
A basis for unionism was always present because of the rotten conditions. The A.F.L. didn’t succeed in the past, and the C.I.O. muffed its big opportunity two years ago because the Stalinists were in complete charge of the packing house campaign,
One must add, however, that in certain sections of the country, where the A.F.L. has progressive leaders, they do have good and strong unions in packing houses. In Ohio, for example.
Recently, the C.I.O. had a resurgence in the packing industry. Top C.I.O. leaders have been directing the work. A national convention of the Packinghouse Workers Organizing Committee was held in Chicago.
Delegates from 94 local unions attended, and the P.W.O.C. claimed 78,000 out of the 129,000 directly employed in this industry.
In 14 Armour plants, the P.W.O.C. has been certified by the National Labor Relations Board as sole collective bargaining agent. In most of the Chicago plants, there is a dispute between the C.I.O. and the A.F.L, on the question of representation. National Labor Relations Board elections probably will be used to settle this question.
 
Principal Demands
The principal C.I.O. demands in the proposal for a signed contract include full recognition of the union, reduction in the speedup, establishment of a proper seniority system, and the elimination of health hazards, as well as wage adjustments.
In his speech, Lewis indicated a realization of the need of working with the farmers in connection with the packing house drive. Just as milk companies try to play off the truck drivers and the dairy producers, the meat packers seek to divide those who work on the farm and those who toil in the packing houses.
It will be a real job to offset this device of the “Big Four” packers.
Calling on Roosevelt to force the big companies to sign agreements indicates that Lewis, urged on by the Stalinists, still has many illusions.
It seems almost incredible that in Chicago, where the steel workers were massacred because of Roosevelt’s double-cross, the C.I.O. is prepared to bank on this same man for assistance.
Unless the C.I.O. adopts more realistic plans, there is a possibility that another “Little Steel” tragedy can occur. Depending on local or state officials is just as fatal. The same old gang that sent the Chicago killer cops against the steel workers remains in power.
 



Victory for organized labor in this W.P.A. battle can mark the beginning of a real offensive against the wave of reaction that gathered strength in the past two years.
This fight should serve as an inspiration for the unemployed and project workers throughout the country. Unless the Workers Alliance, and this is doubtful, can completely divert the energy of the workers.
Strong attention to the need of organizing all W.P.A. and unemployed workers has been brought on by this strike.
 
Life or Death
To the A.F.L. unions involved this battle is virtually a life and death struggle. Unless union scales are maintained on W.P.A. projects, the door would be opened for a nationwide employers’ drive against the building trade union contracts.
Considerable dissatisfaction already exists among the building trades rank and file unionists. The C.I.O. has been exploring the possibility of entering that field.
Reports from Washington indicate that top A.F.L. leaders are already looking around for the scapegoat in the situation. Mathew Woll, prominent in legislature lobbying, it has been hinted, was responsible for the fact that the A.F.L. didn’t put up a fight against the Woodrum bill.
The A.F.L. simply can not afford to lose this strike, and the top leaders apparently know it.
The whole problem of the unemployed and project workers has received a nation-wide spotlight because of the current strike wave. Never again will it be easy to hide it on the last pages of the newspapers.
Victory in this battle brings the possibility of further struggles and victories for the unemployed and project workers. Just as the first C.I.O. strike victories became a national trend, an A.F.L. victory now should serve as a powerful stimulant for all labor.
 
Up to Unions
The value of organized labor taking up the problem of organizing the unemployed and the W.P.A. workers has been clearly demonstrated by the present situation. Contrast the “Right to Work Congress” of the Workers Alliance and all its phoney ballyhoo, to the militant action of the A.F.L. building trades unions. The Workers Alliance served simply to fool the unemployed and project workers into a false sense of security “by trusting our friend Roosevelt.” It weakened the will to struggle of the workers.
The A.F.L. building trades not only have showed themselves as more militant than the Alliance but more capable of putting up a fight for its rights.
And when one reads the Northwest Organizer, organ of the Minneapolis teamsters movement, on the real fight and victories of the unemployed section of the truck drivers union, one sees again the tremendous value and vital necessity of organized labor directly handling the problems of the unemployed and project workers.
 



For years the bosses in the milk industry have used two obvious tricks when dealing with organized labor. One is to play off the farmers against the workers, and the second is to play off either the farmers or workers against the consumers.
The Borden and Sheffield companies are using trick two in an effort to stave off the milk drivers union, representing 20,000 workers, in current negotiations in the New York area.
Before any contract has even been settled, these big milk companies announced a raise in the price of milk of one cent per quart and they threaten another increase shortly.
Of course, company propaganda says that the increase became necessary because of the demands of the union movement.
The companies claim that union demands for wage increases, limitation of production, a five day week, and other standard concessions make a higher cost of production and milk prices must go up.
There is an obvious answer to this propaganda. It is a brief analysis of the profits made by these companies. Borden’s and Sheffield make millions yearly.
 
Public Support
Labor has a right to more than it has been getting in this industry. And labor can get public support if it shows up the company’s huge profits.
We remember very well a similar experience in Ohio in which the milk drivers union around the Akron area fought and obtained better conditions and wage increases, etc., despite the usual hue and cry of the companies on increased costs.
But after the union won, the companies refused to deal with the farmers and rejected their demands for an increase in the price of milk sold to the companies. “We’ve had to give it all to labor, “ the bosses cried.
That kind of propaganda is dynamite. It plays off the farmers against the workers, and too often in the past succeeded in accomplishing this reactionary aim.
In particular, the Ohio farmers were at first enraged at this argument and tended to blame the union for the company refusal to $2.00 per hundredweight instead of $1.50, if our memory serves us correctly.
Here, the C.I.O. movement intervened to straighten out the mess, in cooperation with the milk drivers union.
A joint committee of organized labor and the farmers’ milk association took up the battle of the farmers.
Labor put picket lines around the milk companies. Farmers came into town for miles around to help. Milk supplies were cut off.
But above all, labor organized a first class publicity campaign and explained the whole matter to the workers and the farmers and the consumers.
 
Analyzing Profits
Analysis of the Borden Company profits proved that they could pay the farmers and the workers more. This was emphasized over and over again.
A brief history of how the bosses used labor against the farmer and vice versa was related. All this was done on radio programs which were well publicized and thus received wide hearings.
The result has been that both the milk drivers and the farmers have benefited. A more harmonious relationship between them has resulted.
Of course, in many localities like Minneapolis where organized labor has a shrewd leadership with a progressive outlook, the old stunts don’t work so easy.
The new gag is to organize an “Associated Farmers “ organization, a fake business-inspired, boss-paid strike breaking outfit. This phoney outfit ostensibly speaks for the farmers ... and always goes after the union movement.
Its final and complete exposure came recently before the wages and hours hearings on minimum standards in Washington. This outfit spends all its time explaining why the poorer farmers, the agricultural workers and sharecroppers should be exempt from minimum rates, that is, should continue to work for slave wages.
 



Spontaneous and, in several cases, officially called strikes of A.F.L. craftsmen on W.P.A. construction projects began this week in protest against the destruction of the union scales under the new relief appropriation measure passed by Congress.
In the New York area the strikes were so widespread that Thomas Murray, president of the Building and Construction Council of Greater New York, has called a meeting of his organization and says that official strike sanction is likely.
Murray estimated that 90 per cent of the 32,283 skilled workers on W.P.A. in New York City have stopped work.
 
Resent A.F.L. Policy
Resentment against the reduction in wage rates is directed not only against the Roosevelt administration but also – and this is very important – against the A.F.L. top leadership in Washington for having allowed Congress to delete the prevailing wage clause in the relief appropriation measure.
Under the present schedule, thousands of workers have been notified that they will have to work 130 hours a month to get the same pay they have been getting, on a monthly basis.
Under the old rates paid on a union scale, craftsmen obtained from $1 to $2 an hour, and worked much less than 130 hours.
A comparison of the pay received before the reduction on an hourly basis with union scale of wages and the money to be earned under the new schedule shows that most skilled craftsmen will get 60 cents an hour less! And work many hours more!
 
Facts and Figures
Here is what the New York craftsmen got before:



 


Number
on
rolls
May 31


 


Hours
per
fiscal
period


 


Pay
per
four
weeks




Plasterer


   766


39


$78.00 




Stone cutter


   221


42


  81.02




Stone setter


   113


42


  82.19




Electrician


1,514


42


  84.00




Plumber


1,280


42


  84.00




Steamfitter


   627


42


  84.00




Asbestos w’ker


   268


42


  84.00




Bricklayer


2,459


42


  79.21




Stone mason


   415


42


  79.21




Structural iron worker


   931


44


  84.70




Sheet metal w’ker or roofer


   932


46


  85.10




Glazier


   197


48


  79.20




Rigger


   172


48


  79.20




Tile layer


   316


48


  81.02




Marble cutter or setter


   284


48


  81.02




Metallic lath’er


1,090


48


  84.00




Dock builder


   671


48


  84.00




Compressor op’tor (p’table)


   182


48


  84.00




Carpenter


7,981


49


  85.71




Cement mason


1,786


49


  85.75




Ornament’l iron worker


   840


49


   85.75




Paver (block & granite)


   180


52


  86.27




Bluestone and granite cutter


   123


52


  85.80




Blacksmith


   153


52


  84.60




Waterproofer & tar roofer


   604


53


  84.80




Marble polisher


   145


56


  84.73




Painter


2,593


56


  84.00




Burner


   108


56


  78,40




Welder


     91


60


  84.00




Timberman


1,784


68


  81.60




Pipe caulker


   163


72


  82.80




Mechanic (auto)


   190


80


  80.00



It can hardly be wondered that the A.F.L. members are up in arms over this. William Green, president of the A.F.L., and other top leaders have a real explanation to make for their bad mistake in allowing the reduction to go into effect without a serious fight.
 



The National Labor Relations Board took: a long step backward this week when it announced that hereafter it would permit elections in plants upon an employer’s request.
In the past this is a right which the employers have not had and which they sought keenly because it gave them another weapon with which to harass the unions.
Plenty of trouble lies ahead for the union movement under the new ruling. Take the current C.I.O.-U.A.W.A. strike in General Motors. How will the new N.L.R.B, ruling that goes into effect July 14 effect the strike? The strikers are asking, according to press releases, for a contract covering only their own members. Will the new ruling give General Motors a loophole?
Fortunately, in the auto strike, the stories of the militancy of the workers, reminiscent of the glorious days of the 1937 General Motors strike, give promise that the N.L.R.B. or anyone else will have a hard time turning back the boys.
The auto workers certainly are on the march again. And this serves simply to emphasize the capitulation of the N.R.L.B.
 
Scab Roosevelt
Any doubt that the present reduction in the W.P.A. wages that caused the nation-wide strike was a deliberate move on the part of the Roosevelt administration to bring labor into line for war should be removed in every worker’s mind by two events of this week.
President Roosevelt endorsed the wage reduction and the strike-breaking policies of Colonel Harrington, W.P.A. administrator.
Another despicable blow at the W.P.A. workers was hurled by the administration in announcing that 3,500 theatre workers of the Federal Theatre project would be laid off this month although Congress, in cutting out this project, allowed funds for it to continue until Sept. 1. Since Broadway already has hit its low summer ebb, the W.P.A. ruling is an out- [some text seems to be missing here] order of starvation to the workers involved.
 
A.F.L. Conference
A spectator at the A.F.L. conference in Washington to map out a fight against the Roosevelt administration wage cutting policy on W.P.A. would hardly believe this could be an A.F.L. gathering.
There was some pretty strong language used against the Roosevelt administration. Richard Gray, secretary of the International Bricklayers Union, bluntly blamed Roosevelt for the wage reduction.
Another speaker said Roosevelt had given the A.F.L. the run around and had even refused to see a committee to talk over the matter.
Speakers urged a nation-wide strike on W.P.A. until Congress rectified its error.
New Jersey and Pennsylvania delegates said their members would never go back to work until the wage cuts were rescinded. They urged all other states to pursue a similar policy.
Of course, Bill Green tried to divert the sentiment from direct action channels into purely parliamentary pressure. Both are necessary – especially strike action.
When the most conservative section of the American labor movement is thus aroused it is a hint of the days of struggle to come.
 
Bloody Harlan
“Bloody Harlan” came into its own again this week.
One man was killed and six wounded in a day of shooting involving United Mine Worker pickets, National Guardsmen and scabs.
Garbled press reports fail to say on what side the dead and wounded belonged. Two of the six wounded were strike-breaking guardsmen.
First result of the shooting was to give the guardsmen an “excuse” for rounding up strikers, 250 were hurled in jail.
A reign of terror against the U.M.W.U. has ensued.
Here is a real job for the C.I.O. The Harlan strike must be won.
 



The American labor movement is watching with considerable anxiety
the fate of the union movements in England and France in the present
war.
The facts of the situation in France have trickled into England
and also America, and the story of the strangulation of the French
labor movement is shocking. English unionists are wondering if the
same tragic lot is in store for them. American unionists are
confronted by similar thoughts.
 
Shop Stewards
Daladier and the French military machine recently ordered the
abolition of the shop steward system, among other drastic decrees.
This is like cutting the heart out of a body and expecting it to
function.
The shop steward system has been recognized as the real life, the
heart, and the backbone of a good union. In France, the creation and
extension of the shop steward systems was one of the major victories
of the famous 1936 sit-down strike.
Protection for the rank and file on the job comes primarily
through the shop stewards. They negotiate and settle the day to day
grievances that constantly irritate the workers.
In addition to that vital function however, the shop steward
system in France was the basis for the workers committees that
virtually took power in 1936 – a fact that Daladier has not
forgotten.
Daladier seeks to kill two birds with one stone in his order
abolishing the shop steward system: break the backbone of the unions
and prevent the workers from having committees capable of functioning
in times of social unrest.
Daladier remembers too well how the shop committees became the
embryo Soviets in 1936. It is this eventuality that he tries to
block.
 
War Taxes
How much social dynamite is packed in the French industrial system
is indicated by two other decrees of the Daladier government. All
industrial workers have to “contribute” fifteen per cent
of their wages to a war chest, and 40 per cent of all overtime is
“contributed” to this fund.
Under the pressure of the rising costs of living on the one hand
and the cut in wages on the other hand, combined with longer hours,
speed-up, and accumulation of grievances, the French workers are
building up a terrific resentment that will turn into a gigantic
explosion. Not since the days of Louis Fourteenth have the French
ruling classes been sitting on such a powder keg.
Is it a wonder that the French Foreign Legion and other picked
colonial troops are “judiciously” distributed behind the
front lines?
 
England Too?
The rank and file workers in England are worrying about the
probability that the Chamberlain government, with the approval of the
labor fakers, will further curtail the rights of the union movement
under the guise of war emergency measures.
Do they also face the signing of a pact between the government and
the labor bureaucrats which brings the application of compulsory
overtime and wage cuts, coupled with longer working hours? Are
concentration camps for militant workers, and forced labor under
military control the next step in England? And are the shop
committees in England going to be suppressed?
A story appeared last week that indicates how the English workers
are feeling. Union bureaucrats agreed with an industrial concern not
to press for the solution of certain grievances and a wage dispute.
However, the rank and file through the shop committee organized a
strike that was averted only with the greatest difficulty. The shop
stewards are still sore about the sellout. Orders from the union
bureaucrats are being disregarded. Another strike is threatened.
How many more of these events occurred which do not escape the
censorship? Undoubtedly many. The seeds of unrest are inherent in the
war production schedules.
 



Behind the headlines of the news that the Hollywood technicians
obtained a ten per cent wage increase from the movie producers is the
story of a long struggle conducted by rank and file movements within
the AFL unions there.
For nearly two years, the agitation among the membership of the
American Federation of Studio Workers, an affiliate of the
International Alliance of the Theatrical Stage Employees, rocked the
hide-bound conservatism of the union leadership.
 
Accuse “Czar”
William Bioff, “czar” of the AFL unions in Hollywood,
was accused, among other things, of receiving a “cut” of
$100,000 from movie producers to keep the union in line.
Subsequently, his defense against the charge was that he had merely
borrowed the money.
Conditions in the AFL unions there created a basis for the entry
of the CIO through an industrial union. A National Labor Relations
Board election held this fall brought victory to the AFL partly
because Bioff announced a determination to obtain a wage increase for
all the employees, and actually did negotiate raises for 12,000
craftsmen in the industry.
Stimulated by this success, greater sections of the AFL membership
demanded wage increases. Negotiations began between Bioff and the
producers.
Failure of the movie producers to yield an inch brought the threat
of a strike, which could have enlisted the support of the entire
I.T.A.S.E. with 40,000 movie projection workers in 25,000 theatres,
tying up an industry of 250,000 employees.
 
Win Increase
This threat brought a last-minute compromise which was accepted by
the union. A ten per cent wage increase was given to 23,000
technicians effective until Feb. 15, 1940.
The employers submitted the following written proposal to the
union:
“On or about Feb. 15, 1940 you will give us an
opportunity to show you that the condition of this industry makes a
continuation of wage increases impossible, and further to show you
that we have taken every step possible within our power to readjust
our business so as to make it possible to continue without recalling
these wage increases.”
The movie employers hope to prove that the wages cannot be paid,
and thus the raises would be rescinded from the day they were put
into effect.
In event of a disagreement, an arbitration board will be agreed
upon with final decision in their hands. Of course, there will be
plenty of disagreement, since the union would hardly give up the
increases it has already won.
The pay increases mean a total of $3,000,000 more in wages for the
workers in one year. Because of the seasonal nature of present
employment the studio craftsmen actually earn only $900 a year, and
the raises are a good step forward.
 
A Shady Past
During the negotiations the employers dug up an old conviction
against Bioff for which he has not yet served his time, in an effort
to discredit the union.
Actually, that conviction had nothing to do with unionism. Bioff
was convicted in 1923 in Chicago of collecting money from women in
the red-light section of the city.
Subsequently, he became the bodyguard of George Browne, president
of the I.A.T.S.E., during a bitter and bloody inter-union fight in
Chicago marked by a couple of mysterious killings.
From there he rose to vice-president of the union, a position he
now holds. He was connected with the attempted raid of the I.A.T.S.E.
on the Actor’s Union this fall, an attempt that failed.
The AFL unions in the movie industry would be in a much stronger
position to defend themselves from the employers if the dictatorial
rule of Bioff were overthrown.
Perhaps the present victories of the union on the wage issue will
spur the rank and file movements in their struggle against the Bioff
leadership.
A house-cleaning from below rather than allowing the courts to
settle the question is the only progressive method of removing Bioff.
 



In the daily and pressing struggles which militant unionists face there is little time left for a consideration of the broader questions before the labor movement.
The split in auto, the crisis in textiles, and other trade union matters deserve and obtain serious study from progressive unionists.
However, the life and death question of the attitude of trade unions towards war seems much neglected, especially in comparison to the history of the labor movement from 1914–1918.
In the days of Woodrow Wilson, the anti-war sentiment was so strong that the Democratic president was re-elected on a “Keep America Out of War!” program. Hundreds of thousands of militant workers expressed their opposition to war at union meetings, mass meetings, and other forms of protest.
Eugene Debs grew in stature to a historical figure in the annals of the working class because of his fight against imperialist war.
Militant workers understood very well the implications of a “War to Save Democracy!” in 1917.
 
War-Mongering in the Unions
Today, the foreign exchange and stock market prices jump around at every rumor of war! Confidential Wall Street bulletins speak of 1939 as the “war year!”
Roosevelt blunders and admits his plan to make “France America’s frontier!” Another war to make the world safe for “democracy” with American workers dying in the same trenches in France is in the offing.
How different labor today is reacting to this crisis! Recently, we made a survey of the number of unions that have passed anti-war resolutions. They seem like a mere drop of water compared to the ocean tides of protest that swept the country in 1917.
War-mongering is more common in unions today than anywhere in the country because of the power of the Stalinists who are determined to chain the working class to another imperialist war.
Yet, M Day will bring a virtual fascization of the union movement. And death on the bloody battlefields of imperialist war will be the lot of millions of union militants, not only here but in every country.
 
War Means End of Unions
“Save the Unions!” is the slogan of every serious unionist in fighting the Stalinist rule-or-ruin policy on concrete issues today. Too few unionists understand, however, that the union-wrecking tactics of the Stalinists are part and parcel of their political line. And unions can be saved only by combining the fight against the bosses with the struggle against the Stalinists and their war-mongering.
“Save the Unions!” from the trap that the U.S. General Staff has planned in war-time. No strikes, no shop committees, no direct negotiations, no union meetings if it can be helped. There is only one way to fight this danger. A clear and unambiguous struggle against imperialist war is the method.
Both the C.I.O. and A.F.L. top leadership are for support of Roosevelt’s war plans. Conservative labor leaders in every union also will support the war! And when the federal government suppresses all unionism in war-time the same people will make a feeble criticism too late.
 
Time to Get Tough
The job of every progressive unionist has become tougher. The union wreckers from within the labor movement, the class enemies from without, are determined to crush the workers in the interests of Wall Street and its profit.
Now is the time to take stock of the situation, tighten up the belt another notch, and “get tough.” The union struggles of today are preliminary training bouts to the real battle ahead. It is time to get in shape now for the knock down, drag’em-out fight with capitalism and its war dangers.
 



Over 100,000 steel workers are expected to obtain pay increases this month under the recent ruling of the United States Department of Labor under the provisions of the Walsh-Healy Public Contracts Act covering wages paid on government work in the steel industry.
This represents a victory for the S.W.O.C. which has put up a strong fight for enforcement of the Walsh-Healy law. It is, however, a victory with dangerous potentialities unless further steps are taken to aid the steel workers.
 
Wages as Low as 36¢ an Hour
Briefly, under the federal ruling, the prevailing minimum wages whether arrived at on a time or piece-work basis are supposed to be:

45 cents per hour in the locality consisting of the states of Louisiana, Arkansas, Mississippi, North Carolina, South Carolina, Florida, Oklahoma, Texas, Alabama, Tennessee, Georgia, Virginia and West Virginia (except the counties of Hancock, Brooke, Ohio, Harrison, Monongalia and Marshall);
 
60 cents per hour in the locality consisting of the states of Washington, Oregon and California;
 
60 cents per hour in the locality consisting of the states of Montana, Idaho, Nevada, Wyoming, New Mexico, Utah, Colorado and Arizona;
 
58½ cents per hour in the locality consisting of the states of North Dakota, South Dakota, Nebraska, Kansas, Minnesota, Iowa, Missouri and the area in and about East Saint Louis, Illinois;
 
62½ cents per hour in the locality consisting of the states of Wisconsin, Illinois (except the area in and about East Saint Louis, Illinois), Michigan and Indiana;
 
62½ cents per hour in the locality consisting of Ohio, Pennsylvania, Delaware, Maryland, Kentucky, New Jersey, New York, Connecticut, Rhode Island, Massachusetts, Vermont, New Hampshire and Maine.

“The effect of this decision will be to remove certain definite inequitable wage differentials which give competitive advantage to a number of steel manufacturers who clung, through the years, to a low wage policy,” Philip Murray, S.W.O.C. appointed chairman, said.
In Gadsden and Birmingham, Alabama, for example, wages are as low as 36½ cents an hour. Certainly the wage increases there will be welcome.
 
Big Southern Companies May Pay Less
But the tragedy of the ruling is that it recognizes, with the approval of the S.W.O.C., the right of big companies to pay their southern workers less wages than northern workers. A difference of 17½ cents an hour is allowed between wages in the South and North.
New England is landscaped with “Ghost towns” whose textile industry moved south to get cheap labor. The United Rubber Workers delegation from Akron, Ohio, gave at the C.I.O. convention a vivid picture of decentralization of the rubber industry because of cheap labor elsewhere, and in particular in the same city, Gadsden, Ala.
 
S.W.O.C. Silent On Danger
There is not one word about this danger in the big ballyhoo carried on by Steel Labor, official organ of the S.W.O.C. over the federal decision.
The question of organizing the South properly belongs at the top of the agenda of a national steel convention. In particular steps to implement the federal ruling to boost all wages should be drawn up with rank and file participation.
When are the steel workers going to get a genuine national convention to form their own international union affiliated with the C.I.O., elect their own officers and decide their own program of how to build a powerful and militant industrial organization?
Isn’t it about time that John L. Lewis and Murray and the other C.I.O. top leaders stop prating about defending democracy abroad, and instead be forced to allow a little of it in the C.I.O.
 



Akron, Ohio, rubber workers have learned many valuable lessons in the course of their six years of struggle under the banner of unionism. The powerful weapon of sit-downs arose from the rubber shops of Akron to set off a nation-wide wave that brought success to the C.I.O. in 1936–37.
It is a tragedy that the magnificent history of the rubber workers should be faked to serve the ends of the Stalinist “rule-or-ruin” clique. For that is exactly what Ruth McKenney does in her book, Industrial Valley, just published. McKenney was a sob-sister on the Akron Beacon-Journal most of the time from 1932 to 1936 about which period her book is written. She is a Stalinist and makes no bones about it.
 
Fakes Stalinist Role in Union Growth
Akron union militants who spent the hardest and best years of their lives making great sacrifices to build a union movement will be aroused by McKenney’s impudence in trying to fake a story of the growth of the United Rubber Workers of America which is supposed to convince the “non-believers” that the Stalinists were responsible for developing the union.
During the N.R.A. days, thousands of Akron rubber workers flocked into the A.F. of L. federal unions. The Communist party, however, spent over a year trying to build dual “Red trade unions”! It missed the boat completely. McKenney omits this chapter from the history of the Communist party in Akron.
McKenney vaguely mentions that union progressives fought for industrial unionism and formed caucuses to organize a national struggle for an autonomous rubber workers’ international union. She pointedly omits mentioning that this was done mainly at the Progressive Workers School ...
because the school leaders became “Trotskyist” sympathizers. It was here that S.H. Dalrymple, now president of the U.R.W.A., L.S. Buckmaster, president of Firestone Local, L.L. Callahan, president of Goodrich Local and scores of other rubber workers studied and discussed industrial unionism and other labor problems to prepare themselves for better union leadership in the future. Out of this school in 1934–35 came the ideas which brought the formation of the United Rubber Workers of America in the fall of 1935. The Communist Party was a nearly negligible force then.
 
Goodyear Strike History Distorted
Perhaps the most amazing performance McKenney gives is her writing about the Goodyear strike. Any Akron unionist will tell you that W.J. Carney, now New Jersey C.I.O. director, won his spurs in the C.I.O. movement because of his leadership of the rank and file in this historic strike. McKenney fails even to mention him. Why?
Because she has Stalinist party orders to build up through lies the role of the Stalinists in this strike. Carney, the genuine leader of the rank and file, had the reputation of “working both with the Trotskyists and Stalinists.” He was an independent. He was a close personal friend of this writer.
But McKenney does even worse. She fails to say a word about the real leader of the Communist Party fraction in the Goodyear strike, the only real militant the Stalinists had in those days. He is Lloyd Holmes, a member of the Firestone local, who organized all C.P. work in the rubber unions. Holmes is now under suspicion of “Trotskyism,” although he’s an independent.
Nor do many independent rank-and-file leaders like E.O. Barthol, E.L. Howard, Joe Vaught, Skip O’Harrah, Carl Hooper and others who did noble work in the strike, get any serious mention in this book. Only two Stalinist stooges are given credit. The union men mentioned here are not “Trotskyists.” Far from it. Some are opponents of the revolutionary movement. That does not justify ignoring their good work in the strike. But McKenney is forced to ignore all but true party-liners. How else can a fake history be built up?
 
Frame-up Part of the Stint
Naturally, a book written by a Stalinist can not contain merely distortions, omissions and lies. Since the Moscow trials, frame-ups are a necessary part of the Stalinist literary stint. McKenney does right by Earl Browder on this score too. Her methods are clever, to be sure, but nonetheless obvious and despicable. It has always been a source of extreme annoyance to the Stalinists that certain Akron unionists known as “Trotskyists” did their part to help win the Goodyear strike. This writer, for example, was hired as research director and associate editor of the United Rubber Workers of America, after the Goodyear strike because he lost his job for aiding the strikers.
Yet McKenney blandly quotes Jim Keller, the Stalinist organizer, “And a Trotskyite isn’t a Communist. He works for the company!” Proof? None!
The Stalinists tried, during the strike, to frame this writer on a claim that he published a leaflet attacking the strike leaders and urging rejection of the final strike settlement. Adolph Germer, of the C.I.O., and Powers Hapgood, investigated this C.P. claim, and found it to be a frame-up. There never was any such mimeographed leaflet. At the time that this writer was supposed to be passing out the leaflet, according to C.P. charges, he was in a conference with C.I.O. leaders, as Rose Pesotta, of the I.L.G.W.U. testified. These C.I.O. leaders recommended this writer for the job with the U.R.W.A. afterwards. Today, McKenney seeks again to stir up the frame-up charges.
McKenney worked together with this writer for nearly three years in the Akron Newspaper Guild. We were members of the same progressive caucus. She supported my candidacy for vice-president of the Guild, a post to which I was elected. Later, I became chairman of the Ohio District council of the A.N.G. And in 1936 at the U.R.W.A. convention, even the C.P. voted approval of the writer’s work.
McKenney through her personal experience knows better than to believe the slanders she prints. Yet, once you join the party of lies, you must live a life of lies and tell lies. That is the tragedy of Ruth McKenney. It should serve as a warning to Akron workers.
 



Perhaps the most interesting single feature of the A.F. of L. Executive Council meeting currently taking place in Miami, Florida, has been the admission of the power of rank and file pressure on the top leadership. William Green’s new tone in speaking of the C.I.O. and the prospects of labor unity were the first indications of this pressure. Green openly admitted that the A.F. of L. ranks wanted peace with the C.I.O.
 
Ignore Rank and File Sentiments
But the muddling around with the Wagner Labor Act was even more pertinent. Authoritative reports said that in private sessions the Executive Council was divided in its attitude towards modification of the Wagner Act. In fact, we were told, it came almost to an open and public division on the question. Here again, the sentiments of the rank and file were an important consideration.
In typical A.F. of L. fashion a compromise – a bad one, to be sure – was worked out. The A.F. of L. Council demands an end to the present National Labor Relations Board set-up with its three-man membership and its replacement with a five-man board which would be composed of new people. Details of the A.F. of L. proposal are supposed to be worked out by attorneys, the idea having been approved in principle.
In playing around with vital legislation, the A.F. of L. Executive Council is guilty of injuring the interests of the entire labor movement. We believe that even part of the Council recognizes this fact. The specter of Oregon haunts them. In this state, a suicidal civil war between the C.I.O. and A.F. of L. has brought the introduction of suppressive legislation against labor which has frightened even the oldest labor skates.
 
Usual Blast Against Progressive Unionism
It is a commonplace that no Executive Council meeting has been normal unless some blast at progressive unionism issues therefrom. This time the Teachers Union was singled out as the “hot-bed of communism” and a drive against all political tendencies within the Teachers Union is in the offing.
This blast coincided with the publication of a resolution by the Council that it favored appropriation of adequate funds for the Dies committee. It was Green’s way of saying to Dies, “We’ll take care of the reds in the A.F. of L., you can devote your energies elsewhere.” By which he meant a further investigation of the C.I.O.
The overwhelming support the Dies committee obtained in Congress served as a clear warning of the coming “anti-red” drive in America. In this connection it is worth telling a story of the attitude of the top C.I.O. leaders on this problem.
When the Dies committee was engaged in its ludicrous but extremely dangerous performance, various Washington newspapermen urged the C.I.O. to take a tough stand against it and fight against its continuation. The C.I.O. leaders scoffed at the effect the Dies committee was having. Now the Gallup polls’ revelation of the widespread support of the Dies committee reflected in the Congressional action has brought the cold facts to the C.I.O. leaders. But more on that some other time.
 
Refugee Stand Is Contemptuous
The A.F. of L. Council got “international-minded,” too. It proposed to revitalize moribund Latin-American unions in a Pan-American labor conference to offset the John L. Lewis maneuvers in tying up with the Stalinist-controlled Mexican and South American unions in the form of the Latin-American Labor Federation.
No unionist will object to the A.F. of L.’s approval of a plan to permit entry of 10,000 refugee children to America. But this is such a meagre answer to the refugee problem that scorn and contempt for the attitude of the Council is well-founded. What about opening the doors to all refugees? What about supporting the trade-unionist refugees? What about blasting Roosevelt for his crocodile tears for the refugees while he refuses them entrance into America?
Yes, it’s the same old Executive Council, blind on industrial unionism, reactionary in politics, and shortsighted from even the most elementary trade-union point of view.
 



The Party and Yipsels went to town Monday night against the fascist meeting.
Tens of thousands of people watched the Socialist Workers Party lead the anti-fascist forces in the counter rally. And the Stalinist and Socialist rank and filers who joined with our forces were sick at the abject failure of their parties.
* * *
A tour of the Madison Square Garden area two hours before the anti-fascist demonstration began was reminiscent of a trip through an army camp. Blue-coats and dicks swarmed around every street like bees in a hive. This didn’t daunt the spirit of the antifascists in the least.
* * *
51st Street and 8th Avenue was the center of the biggest rally. Tens of thousands joined our forces there in a splendid demonstration against the fascists.



“We Demand the Right to Picket:”
“Stop the Fascist Meeting!”
“Workers, Unite to Fight Fascism!”
“Long Live the S.WP.!”



These slogans roared from the crowd and rolled down Times Square and into the fascist meeting!
* * *
Cheers thundered as speaker after speaker called for the formation of Workers Defense Guards to fight fascism. In turn, Max Shachtman, Natie Gould, B.J. Widick, Marty Abern, James Burnham, and Bill Morgan aroused the huge gathering to demonstrate their hatred of fascism. Lifted to the shoulders of some husky Yipsel comrades, the speakers castigated the cops who sat nervously on their mounts a few feet away. Boos at every mention of LaGuardia’s name indicated the temper of the workers present.
* * *
Pride in the Fourth International was written in every comrade’s face as thousands of people joined in our parade down Times Square and around Eight Avenue. Side-walk spectators frequently applauded as the cry of “Smash the fascists in New York,” came from the marchers. The streets and sidewalks were jammed.
* * *
Outstanding among the marchers were fifty Negro workers who came down to aid in fighting fascism. It was their first contact with the S.W.P.
* * *
A social-democrat remarked, “I’ve always respected the Trotskyists for their brilliant theories, and now I’ll have to give them credit for their action!”
* * *
A perplexed Stalinist said, “How can these Trotskyist fascists picket the fascist meeting?” To which a comrade replied, “The point is that they aren’t fascists, and where is your party?”
* * *
An army officer looked at the parade scornfully. “Bash the heads of a couple of their leaders and they’ll all run,” he said. Fifteen minutes later, the cops tried it but didn’t get very far.
* * *
An unknown hero showed how workers want to fight fascism. When the cops rode into the demonstration, he grabbed the bit of a horse and tried to stop him from trampling over the marchers. He tried again, and it took six cops to stop him.
* * *
After the brief skirmish at 48th Street and 8th Avenue, a group of bystanders were plenty sore. “I never thought they’d dare do that.” “This turns a new light on the cops!” “Nothing but cossacks!” were typical comments.
* * *
Perhaps the hardest job anyone had was legal defense work assistance. Far away from the scene of the demonstration, comrades sat tensely all evening waiting to hear from the demonstration in the event that legal defense was necessary. The strain was terrific. By midnight, the comrades were exhausted. It was tough to be away from the firing line, but a job had to be done, and it was done.
* * *
A few brash Nazis tried to raise a little hullabaloo among the anti-fascist demonstrators early in the evening. It didn’t take long to convince them forcefully that it was a mistake to try anything.
* * *
Two arrogant fascists going to the meeting got smart in a subway. A professorial-looking gentleman broke a good tennis racquet explaining anti-fascism to them. We were told that his arguments made an impression.
* * *
Perhaps the best way to describe the spirit of the comrades at the demonstration is to say that it was only equalled in our experience by the magnificent display of militancy of the Akron rubber workers and the Flint auto workers in the days of the great C.I.O. strikes. Hats off to the New York militants! They came through with flying colors in their first big test in action!
 



Some 18,000 dressmakers of the I.L.G.W.U. demonstrated last Tuesday for one hour on Eighth Avenue at 35th St. against the Dress Trucking Association for refusing to sign a union contract.
It was an impressive sight. It should bring results to the workers involved.
Suppose a similar demonstration had been called by the officials of the I.L.G.W.U. one day sooner as a protest against the Nazi meeting at Madison Square Garden? Suppose other unions officially had participated in our fight against the fascists?
Picture 250,000 workers surrounding Madison Square Garden hours before the Nazi meeting was called. Obviously there would have been no fascist rally.
Powerful as the anti-Nazi rally was, it could have been invincible with cooperation of the union officials.
 
Labor Officials Abjectly Silent
Instead, the labor officials were conspicuous only by their abject silence. Is this all they have learned from the experiences in Italy, Germany, Austria, Spain and elsewhere?
A young reporter went around to various prominent union headquarters to ask them what they thought or were going to do about the Nazi meeting.
The Amalgamated Clothing Workers officials gave him a run-around. “Can’t make any statement. Joint Board members out of town. Can’t issue it myself,” declared one official who was interviewed.
“I couldn’t get within a mile of Dubinsky,” the reporter said. Other officials privately said the counter-demonstration was a mistake. “Playing into the hands of the fascists by giving them publicity,” one said. It was the old story of an ostrich sticking his head into the sand when he saw danger coming ... but that didn’t eliminate the danger. Look at the trade unionists in Nazi concentration camps. They learned too late how to keep Hitler from power.
Stalinist-controlled unions followed the C.P. policy of complete silence. So did Local 22, of the I.L.G.W.U. Last week, the Lovestoneite Workers Age said exactly nothing about the coming Nazi meeting.
 
Rank and File Labor Took Action
Organized labor acted only through the splendid initiative of rank and file unionists who joined us in the anti-Nazi rally.
It was no accident that the very cops who broke picket lines protected the Nazi assemblage. Cops and Fascists both are anti-union to the core. Only powerful, well-organized and militant picket lines can preserve the workers rights against them.
The rank and file in large numbers have learned this lesson from their own experience and the tragic fate of the trade union movement in Europe. That is why they joined our demonstration.
This lesson must be understood by every union man if a victorious fight against fascism is to take place.
And a real campaign to break the lethargy and inertia of the trade union bureaucracy before the menace of fascism is a major task for every progressive worker.
 



Two significant straws in the wind of the trends in the labor movement in relation to the coming world war were revealed last week. From Buffalo, N.Y., came news that the S.W.O.C. had signed a contract with the J.H. Williams Steel Co. which included a clause guaranteeing continuation of seniority rights to employees drafted for conscription in war.
Now every unionist is in favor of observation of seniority rights under all circumstances.
What is disturbing is the calm acceptance of the idea of conscription during war-time.
It remains to be seen if this is an official S.W.O.C. national policy or whether it was done purely on a local scale.
The steel company’s acceptance of this clause was a clever maneuver to pacify the resentment still felt by workers from their experiences after the world war.
Thousands of soldiers returned to U.S.A. and found that their jobs had been taken permanently by those, “who stayed behind,” as they were called. This fact was the source of considerable agitation among the ex-service men.
 
Purge Aliens
A report from North Tarrytown, N.Y., indicates how fa General Motors has gone with its policy of purging alien employees. Over 175 out of the 3,000 employees have been dropped from the pay-roll permanently because they were not American citizens.
Regrettable is the fact that this policy has been pursued pith the approval of the auto workers union. Joseph Galgano, financial secretary of Local 118, U.A.W.A., made it very clear in his comments to reporters that the union was not taking any stand against the dismissals.
He added that the purge was done with War Department approval. It was part of the preparation for M-day. A leading steel progressive from another area informed us that a similar purge was being carried on in many steel plants. Unfortunately, the S.W.O.C. is doing nothing to prevent this terrible kind of discrimination. In fact, even mention of this subject in some unions brings howls of disapproval.
Of course, this purge policy is in line with Roosevelt’s policy of throwing all “aliens” off W.P.A. and home relief.
We have heard not one word of protest over this cold-blooded plan of starving every non-American citizen living here from those who shed crocodile tears over the fate of the refugees in Europe.
 
Wealthy Don’t Suffer
It is not the petty-bourgeois or wealthy “foreigner” who suffers from this purge policy. Only the workers who came from Europe and plunged into the factories will suffer – the workers who toiled so hard that exhaustion at night prevented any activity but sleep in preparation for another day’s hard work.
It is these workers who are being blacklisted from all jobs. They face outright starvation! They can’t even get on relief!
Acceptance of this policy happens, among other things, to be a violation of the constitution of the C.I.O. which solemnly pledged to organize and protect all workers irrespective of race, creed, color, etc., etc.
More fundamental than this, it is a direct expression of the development of chauvinism and its deliberate extension by the bosses among the workers in an effort to divide them and also whip up their patriotism.
To those of us whose very life and ideas stem from the spirit of internationalism, sharpest struggle in unions to prevent this blow at working class solidarity is an elementary duty.
 



The first constitutional convention of the Textile Workers Organizing Committee began last week end in Philadelphia with an interesting report by Sidney Hillman, chairman, and Emil Rieve, executive director.
Since the entire report is not yet available only the high points can be mentioned at the present time.
It was estimated that $1,200,000 weekly wages increases had been won by the C.I.O. union for textile workers in the last two years, or about $2.50 a week for those workers under C.I.O. contracts or in the T.W.O.C. In view of the increase in the cost of living and the unemployment raging in the textile industry, this hardly constitutes a remarkable gain.
The way that the Hillman-Rieve report states the membership figures likewise is a bit unusual.
“About 235,000 textile workers employed by 950 companies are now working under contracts signed by the T.W.O.C. In addition, 150,000 textile workers have signed membership cards, and agreements covering 39,000 are being negotiated by the T.W.O.C.”
 
Union’s Strength
What is the strength of the union? Is it 235,000 plus 150,000? We wish that were the case.
Few of the 950 companies have shops completely unionized, even though all the workers employed there obtain the full benefits of the contracts. The job of building the unions after the contracts have been signed by negotiations through the top is a main task of the T.W.O.C. and one in which it has done little.
150,000 textile workers, in addition, have signed cards. Good. Now to make them into first class union men. It takes plenty of time, patience and good organizers. A frank discussion about this problem at the convention would do a lot to give a real program to solve this problem. Unfortunately, we doubt if such a discussion will ensue.
When the wages-hours law was passed by Congress, it was viewed as a great let-down from the needs and desires of the workers. But wages are so low in many areas, specifically textile, that this mild reform legislation will boost textile wages $13,800,000 for 181,000 workers in one year. A good selling point for the T.W.O.C., because the C.I.O. pressed hard for the wages-hours law.
 
Finance Report
How unionism has achieved a big business status through the organizing campaigns of the C.I.O. is illustrated by the report of finances of the T.W.O.C. convention.
Nearly $2,400,000 has been spent in the textile organizing campaign of the last two years, according to the financial report. The C.I.O. textile union alone spent $1,780,797. Sister organizations spent $300,000 on its behalf, and affiliated Locals and Joint Boards spent another $350,000. Lacking the militant program that marked the development of the C.I.O. auto workers union, the T.W.O.C. has less to show for itself, despite the great financial expenditures.
How this campaign was financed is also shown in the report. Contributions from C.I.O. unions totalled $916,000. The Amalgamated Clothing Workers gave $523,000, the United Mine Workers $198,000, the International Ladies Garment Workers Union $110,000 and the C.I.O. $85,000. This solidarity among the C.I.O. unions is one of the splendid achievements of the new industrial unionism movement.
The positive side of the T.W.O.C. campaign, with all its faults and difficulties, is revealed by a comparison of the status of unionism in the textile industry in 1937 and today.
When the C.I.O. made its agreement with the United Textile Workers in 1937 setting up the Textile Workers Organizing Committee, the U.T.W. had 25 union contracts and a membership of around 73,000. Now the T.W.O.C. has contracts, as reported above, with 950 companies covering 235,000 workers.
 



AKRON, Ohio – The current issue of the Summit County Labor News gives a succinct picture of the latest developments in the labor movement here which reveal the great changes that have taken place since the hey-day of the C.I.O.:
“Two incidents happened last week which brought a jolt to Akron residents. One was the announcement of the Goodrich Company that it would build a plant for making rubber soles and heels, in Clarksville, Tenn. The other was the brutal attack upon a picket line at the Loewenthal Rubber Co. by Akron police.
“The background of the strike of the Loewenthal workers is one which is only too common. Back in January, 1938 the company pleaded with its workers that it needed a wage reduction in order to stay in business. It said that as soon as a 90-day emergency was over the wage cut would be restored. It said that if the wage cut were accepted, all workers would be kept on the payroll.
“The workers believed the company. They trusted to its sense of honesty and fairness. They accepted a wage reduction. Two weeks later 30 men were laid off, and when the 90-day emergency period was up, the company forgot to restore the wage cut. The workers went along arguing and discussing the matter with company representatives and always they were put off.
“Finally, last week-end they decided they had taken the cut long enough. They felt that their confidence and trust had been betrayed. They went on strike.”
 
“Law and Order”
“The, company wanted to move out some finished orders. The pickets picketed the railroad tracks. The train crews refused to run the pickets down. The Akron police appeared on the scene. They surrounded the pickets.
“They told the pickets to move on. The pickets moved slowly. Too slowly to suit the police. Without warning, they attacked the picket line – wielding clubs and revolver butts.
“A one-armed man who lost his arm in the course of his work at Loewenthal was clubbed into insensibility. The president of the union, Steve Oziomek, was apparently singled out for attention, because three policemen made for him, surrounded him, and pounded his head and shoulders with clubs and a revolver butt. When he fell to the ground he was kicked and beaten yet more.”
On the question of the decentralization of Goodrich with its threat to the U.R.W.A., the Summit County Labor News quotes L.L. Callahan, president of the Goodrich Local, which fought and won a battle against a proposed wage cut last spring.
“The B.P. Goodrich company has developed from a small shop, valued at a few thousand, to a great corporation with assets now totaling some 147 million dollars. All o has been brought about, in span of some sixty odd years. The brawn and muscle of the people of the Akron area are primarily responsible for this company’s phenomenal success.
 
Profits vs. Wages
“The company cleared more than $2,000,000 profit last year, despite the fact that many other companies lost their holdings in the same period. Certainly labor did not benefit greatly through this period, even though they were able to maintain their hourly wages. Indeed the India Rubber World says of the Akron factories ‘Reduced labor cost per dollar value output and recent increase in tire prices ... contribute to a substantial improvement in earnings compared with 1939.’ The Wall Street Journal also recently reported that labor costs in Akron rubber factories declined last year.”
Callahan blasted away at the Akron Beacon-Joural which printed an editorial blaming labor for the decentralization proposal of Goodrich. Counteracting this propaganda is a major task of the C.I.O. movement here.
And the problem of the unceasing police terror against all picket lines becomes more acute daily.
 



Those unionists who did not get stirred up about the Apex court decision which fined a C.I.O. union over one million dollars certainly got a real jolt this week.
Republic Steel’s suit against the C.I.O. for alleged damage of $7,500,000 awoke labor to the danger existing to its welfare in the present legal and court system.
The impudence of the Republic Steel company is matchless. Its notorious strike-breaking record, especially in the “Little Steel” strike, is well-known. Back in 1936 this company broke another strike. We remember vividly the company thugs rolling out of the plant in a huge armored truck, blasting away at the picket line with shot guns and tear gas, and then the clubbing that ensued.
This scab company finds a legal pretext to sue the C.I.O. Obviously the purpose of this move is to harass and worry the C.I.O.
 
Goodyear Gall
Even more arrogant is the action this week of Goodyear Tire & Rubber company’s lawyers at the National Labor Relations Board hearings on charges made by Local 2, United Rubber Workers of America.
Goodyear has figured out a clever technique for using the N.L.R.B. hearings against the union.
The company stunt is based on the fact that the Supreme Court ruled sit-downs illegal. Goodyear is therefore claiming that the many sit-downs in its Akron plants not only were illegal but also hurt company business (which would legally call for damages.)
Goodyear’s reply to the N.L.R.B. charges was so bitter and threatening that it created a furor at the opening of the hearings.
Trial Examiner T.E. Dudley postponed the hearings for a week while he thought over the company attorneys’ request to introduce evidence going back to the famous 1935 sit-down strike.
 
Interlocking Directors
Leading capitalists on the Republic Steel Co. board of directors also are on Goodyear’s Board. Tom Girdler is an influential member of Goodyear’s Board. When the N.L.R.B. called the hearings on Republic steel it caught the company unprepared. In the Goodyear case, ample time was spent in preparing the case and above all, a smart set of lawyers were hired by Goodyear to handle the hearings. Republic Steel saw to this.
Akron’s leading anti-union firm, Thomas, Buckingham, Doolittle and Company, were hired to defeat the union. They know more about Akron labor history than the lawyers of the N.L.R.B.
The interlocking directorates of Republic Steel and Goodyear show another thing. The suit against the C.I.O. for $7,500,000, the fight of Goodyear at the N.L.R.B. hearings, the preparation for a suit against the U.R.W.A., all these anti-union moves come directly from Wall Street interests owning rubber and steel plants.
 



Two mergers involving four C.I.O. unions are taking place this month.
After a long campaign by the Fur Workers union, the National Leather Workers Association recently voted to join with the furriers in a proposed International Fur and Leather Workers Union of the United States and Canada.
This week-end the fur workers, opened their convention in Atlantic City. Approval of the amalgamation which its executive board recommends is considered a foregone conclusion.
The Fur Workers convention is openly and flagrantly dominated by the Stalinists, headed by the notorious Ben Gold, president of the union.
 
Factional Capital
Gold expects to make much factional capital out of the merger. The Daily Worker informs the unsuspecting world that this merger, according to Mr. Gold, will join 100,000 workers together. Convention delegates are being told the same thing.
The C.I.O. News, however, claims no more than 50,000 members for the furriers and 4,500 for the leather workers. Gold’s exaggerations are designed to bolster his fading prestige in his own union.
This beloved leader of the masses obtained a measly vote of 252 out of 3,500 members in his own local union as delegate to the convention!
His whole administration is so utterly bankrupt that only a tragic mistake in tactics by progressive forces returned his clique to power. Gold’s election maneuvers were so revolting (ruling members out of voting rights, denial of impartial watchers at election booths, etc.) that the progressives decided to boycott the election.
Less than 1,400 members in the New York area out of 15,000 voted in this election. Progressives within the leather workers know these facts. They realize that within the proposed International Fur and Leather Workers Union, Gold and his Stalinist machine will seek to gain complete domination over the leather division.
On the other hand, the merger enables the progressive forces within both divisions to unite and oust the bankrupt Stalinist misleadership.
 
Another Merger
A merger between the United Textile Workers Union and the Textile Workers Organizing Committee is scheduled at the five-day national conventions of these organizations in Philadelphia on May 15.
Motive behind the sudden display of democracy on the part of the Hillman machine is the attempt to offset the reactionary split from the C.I.O. of Francis J. Gorman, former vice-president of the U.T.W.U. with a small group of locals.
Since the hosiery workers federation and the dyers federation, both strongly entrenched in their respective industries, will participate in the convention of the T.W.O.C., it should be lively. It will take a lot of patching up behind the scenes to remove some of the antagonism we’ve heard expressed against the Hillman machine.
Under present plans, the textile union and the T.W.O.C. locals will each hold a separate convention for a few days, until the proposed merger is approved. Then they will unite into a single convention.
Chief bone of contention at the textile convention will be the scramble for paid jobs. Lack of finances prevents Hillman from settling such problems the easy way: a job for every official.
Among the other tragedies of the C.T.O. is the fact that the textile industry drive didn’t live up to advance expectations. Out of 1,250,000 workers the T.W.O.C. now claims 200,000 under contract (a year ago, the figure of 500,000 used to be tossed around blandly.) Another 176,000 workers will be covered under contracts now being negotiated, the union claims.
Planning of a serious organizing drive should be one of the big jobs of the merged unions. Over 120,000 textile workers will get wage increases under the wages and hours law in July. An aggressive campaign centering around the fact that C.I.O. pressure brought this benefit could bring these workers into the fold.
 



The stakes in the fight between the United Mine Workers of America and the Appalachian coal operators are growing higher and more important every day, as the large issues confronting the American labor movement project themselves into the scene.
This strike of 320,000 miners who might be joined next week by another 100,000 unionists has significance not merely because of the huge numbers involved – decisive as this itself might be – but also because of the indispensable nature of the coal industry especially in war-time, and because of the strategic role of the U.M.W.A. in the entire C.I.O. movement.
Future prospects of the C.I.O. depend considerably on a victory or at least an avoidance of serious defeat by the U.M.W.A. in its present struggle.
Questions of the role of the union movement in war-time, the next steps in unity negotiations between the C.I.O. and the A.F. of L., and the inner regime of the C.I.O. hinge on the outcome of the coal strike.
Roosevelt’s intervention in the dispute is considered a matter of days. How he uses his powerful position and influence on the strike settlement will reveal much on what treatment labor can expect from his war machine. How John L. Lewis reacts to government intervention should furnish a pretty good gauge of Mr. Lewis’s actions in the next war.
 
The Main Issue
Main issue of the strike is the U.M.W.A. demand for a closed shop. Already all economic demands have been withdrawn by the C.I.O. negotiators. Lewis has indicated his willingness to compromise still further and insist only on a union shop and the removal of the penalty clause for strikes in violation of contract.
To understand the vital importance of this issue one must remember that the A.F. of L. is supporting wholeheartedly the organizing campaign of its recent affiliate, the Progressive Miners of America, a reactionary and dual union in the coal mining field.
Exclusion of this rival is necessary to prevent a bloody and costly internecine war with the A.F. of L. in this field. Even partial success by the A.F. of L. would spur hopes in William Green and the die-hard clique that ruin of the C.I.O. is possible. The least the A.F. of L. bureaucrats would gain is further weakening of the C.I.O. thereby making probable a unity pact which would definitely tend to be reactionary.
 
Bill Green’s Game
Latest proposal of William Green to the federal conciliator in the coal strike shows what a shrewd and demagogic game he is playing to stab the C.I.O. in the back. Once a member of the U.M.W.A., Green knows of rank and file resentment within the miners union over Lewis’ dictatorial control and unsavory record of the 1920’s. Green was part of that Lewis machine. Now he proposes a national miners’ referendum to determine collective bargaining representatives, hoping thus to capitalize on the resentment.
Best answer to the phoney Green proposal is introduction of more democracy within the U.M.W.A. Ohio miners, for example, would take more kindly to the Lewis regime if district officers were elected, not appointed. It is the inner flaw within the C.I.O. set-up which the A.F. of L., even more guilty, uses hypocritically. A bureaucratic regime exists in both organizations. Lewis has the additional handicap of placing the albatross of Stalinism around the neck of the C.I.O.
Just as the interests of the entire labor movement are injured by the A.F. of L. attacks on the Wagner Labor Disputes Act, the invasion into the U.M.W.A. territory threatens to bring the possibility of a bigger open shop drive in major industry.
Powerful utility, steel and other industrial forces are backing the coal operators and insisting on an open shop drive. The A.F. of L. fight against the C.I.O. in this industry can only aid in those plans.
 



A rubber worker asked us to explain why the A.F.L. top leadership is so vehemently opposed to the present Wagner Labor Relations Act.
The best source of explanation lies in the A.F.L. leadership itself.
In the current issue of the A.F.L. weekly news letter, William Green’s fight against the Wagner Act is made clear, although, of course, the reasons given are mainly reactionary. Just as the A.F.L. bureaucracy fight against the Act is reactionary.
 
The Nub of the Question
“Many craft unions are threatened with dissolution and destruction by Board decrees,” the A.F.L. declares. It refers, of course, to decrees of the National Labor Relations Board operating under the Wagner Act.
“For example, in the Fried-Ostermann case the employer manufactured both clothing and gloves. They were separate departments. Glove making has always been a separate craft during the entire history of organized labor.”
“The glove makers were practically one hundred per cent members of the A.F.L. glove workers union. The majority of the clothing workers were members of a clothing workers union not affiliated with the A.F.L. A dispute arose over representation.”
“The clothing workers requested the Board to fuse the glove workers and declare them one unit ... The Board did so.”
“In a recent decision (Finch case) the Board went so far as to hold that a carpenter who had voted for his A.F.L. Union could not refuse to be represented by a C.I.O. liquor distillery workers’ organization.”
The A.F.L. statement significantly adds, “Everyone knows that in this country there are countless plants where single A.F.L. craftsmen, such as stationary engineers, electricians, carpenters and the like, are employed.”
That brings us to the crux of the matter. It is absolutely inevitable that the N.L.R.B. “favor” industrial unions since collective bargaining is on a plant wide basis. We are for that policy 100 per cent.
 
Against Labor’s Interests
Industrial union interests won over craft interests in both cases cited by the A.F.L. statement. We remember how 14 A.F.L. craft unions were replaced in the Akron rubber shops by one industrial union. The workers benefited more under industrial unionism.
Put the threat to their craft positions and their placing of craft interests above the interests of the labor movement as a whole, causes the A.F.L. top leaders to struggle against any legislation or policy which even indirectly favors industrial unionism.
The fact that the A.F.L. statement mentions as an example the incident of a carpenter is not accidental. Bill Hutcheson, carpenters’ union president, is leader of the die-hard clique in the A.F.L. council. His blind and selfish craft interest makes him the leader of the A.F.L. opposition to the present Wagner Act. Since his union has 300,000 members, his voice has been very powerful in A.F.L. council meetings. Hutcheson, whose role in the labor movement we explained recently in a column, is determined to preserve his bureaucratic privileges at all costs.
And, by the way, the A.F.L. opposition to Edwin Smith, N.L.R.B. member, is not a “mistake” as commonly supposed. He happens to be strongly in favor of “one collective bargaining agency” for a plant. Industrial unionism, in other words. That is why Green centered so much fire on him.
The A.F.L. proposal to replace the present three man board with a five man board, along with other amendments, is a maneuver to make the N.L.R.B. pro-craft union if possible.
Blind bureaucrats like Hutcheson would even prefer no legislation and at least the abolition of the Wagner Act to anything which is not favorable to their reactionary philosophy.
 



Over the week end we were talking to a former coal miner from Harlan County, Ky., now working in a gum shop in Akron, O. He has had much experience in the union drives down there. One story he told illustrates in particular the feelings of the workers and gives a clue to an understanding of their militancy now against the National Guard terror.
In one of the earlier coal strikes in Kentucky, the miners had done an extremely effective job of keeping scabs out. So the operators called for and the governor sent in National Guardsmen.
This didn’t please the strikers one bit. They planned a little reception for the National Guard when it detrained.
No sooner did the train stop at the county seat than hundreds of coal miners, well-equipped to defend themselves, took positions about 100 yards away from the railroad station.
 
Guard Moves On
The captain of the Guardsmen stepped off the train and looked around with great anxiety. About this time, an old veteran of many strike struggles sauntered up from the strikers’ ranks.
He looked the captain over, and deliberately. The silence was oppressive and the atmosphere tense. Finally the miner drawled out, “You figuring on getting off the train here?”
“Why, yes,” the captain replied.
“Well, the boys told me to tell you in that case to be sure to be shooting when you get off because we sure as hell are going to be,” the veteran declared, and walked away.
The National Guard did not detrain. They went to a nearby town instead.
Similar in many respects is the attitude of the miners in the current strike. Anyone familiar with Harlan County will find nothing strange in the union statement on the shootings that took place last week.
Readers will recall that various skirmishes have been reported between the Guardsmen and alleged strikers. The union leaders denied that their men had participated in the battles for a very simple reason.
“Our boys could hit a mosquito at fifty yards and nobody can tell me that they fired fifty shots (as the Guard claimed) without someone being hit,” the union leaders said.
This is absolutely true. Using rifles since boyhood, the folks in Harlan County are noted for their accuracy. We are convinced that the shooting scrapes last week were put-up jobs by the coal operators and the National Guardsmen to seek to justify the strike-breaking terror of the Guardsmen.
 
Bloody Record
There has never been a more stirring chapter in labor history than the story of the Harlan miners’ attempts to organize unions. Fourteen operators are now under indictment for charges ranging from conspiracy to murder, to sluggings of union men, so bad have been the conditions there.
Bloody Harlan has a record of killings of union organizers and men unequalled anywhere in the country.
Despite all this terror, the United Mine Workers gained strength. It is powerful there now – unbeatable if the union leaders stick to their guns.
Last week the miners showed their contempt for the National Guard terror by trying to picket at the mines even though bayonets were thrust at their stomachs. And when a machine gun was mounted, unarmed pickets tried to get around it. Only the arrival of additional forces kept the miners back.
When one remembers that in Ohio strikes were called off in Norwood, etc., because of the mere threat of the National Guard, the splendid courage of the Harlan miners stands out even more strongly.
The Harlan strike is a great embarrassment to the apologists of democratic capitalism. The Daily Worker played it down last week. Here, union men can see capitalism stark naked, a rule by force.
Fortunately, the boys in Harlan County come from a grand school where they learned matchless militancy, dependence on one’s own strength, and dauntless courage. Watch them whip the operators.
 



Too many reports have been coming from Washington, D.C., in the last two months of a growing estrangement between John L. Lewis, C.I.O. chairman, and President Roosevelt to ignore any longer.
Certainly, the Lewis letter blaming the Roosevelt administration for the impasse in the coal strike can hardly make relations between them friendlier.
Lewis was chagrined by the failure of the Roosevelt administration to support legislation guaranteeing union rates and conditions on all government armament orders, as we pointed out in, a previous column of the Socialist Appeal.
Then Lewis let it be known in Washington that he was suspicious of Roosevelt’s crusader policy in foreign affairs. Off the record he suggested to some reporters that he was an isolationist. At least his statements hinted strongly in that direction.
In his letter against the Roosevelt administration policy in the coal strike, Lewis made this very significant statement, referring to the fact that Kentucky, West Virginia, etc., were withholding unemployment benefits to the strikers. “The implications of this situation are obvious when one considers the political control in the four states in question.” Only Pennsylvania, with a recently elected Republican administration, has ruled that the strikers are entitled to unemployment insurance checks!
 
Union Sacred
Since Lewis can scarcely be classified as a dull politician, his attitude must be judged as reflecting to a large extent the feelings of his followers, especially the miners.
To the miners, one thing is sacred. That is the union. Unionism is part and parcel of their lives. All events and people are judged primarily by their effect on the union.
While Roosevelt has great personal popularity among the workers, it has been diminishing, and the empty stomachs of the miners will promote this growing tendency.
Under the impact of events Lewis’ followers are beginning to realize that a policy of tail-ending the Roosevelt administration means continued retreat and weakening of the C.I.O.
Over two months ago we heard from a man who has been associating with Lewis for twenty years that he was thinking of switching his party alliance again. It should be remembered that Lewis was a Republican for most of his life. And he considers the Southern Democrats and the Hagues as the most dangerous opponents of the C.I.O.
The fact that most of Lewis’ strength in the labor movement centers around industrial areas which are heavily isolationist, furnishes a clue to his position on foreign policy. The “unreasonableness” of the Army and Navy departments on the armaments orders must also have cooled Lewis’ ardor for supporting Roosevelt in a holy war against fascism.
 
Important Trend
The political implications of this new trend in the policies of Lewis – who is the decisive subjective factor in determining C.I.O. programs – are far-reaching and should be carefully borne in mind.
His blast at Roosevelt runs directly counter to the basic policy of his Stalinist allies who played down this angle of the coal strike in the Daily Worker. His private opinions on foreign policy, while not basically different, do likewise.
A more favorable setting for Labor Party agitation has been created as a result of his criticism of Roosevelt and the Democratic Party. It would be no easy job to switch the workers from one bankrupt party to another bankrupt party.
Postscript: Another, reason for the coolness between Lewis and Roosevelt is the wielding of what Louis Stark, New York Times labor reporter, called the “big stick” by Roosevelt on the C.I.O. and the A.F. of L. to patch up a labor peace. The “big stick” happened to be a threat of compulsory arbitration of all labor disputes, we were informed.
 



The blast of the Navy Department against the CIO this week charging that labor was seriously jeopardizing national defense through its struggle for decent wages and conditions was a deadly warning of days to come.
It was in line with the recent charge of the Chrysler Corp. that the auto workers union was sabotaging production.
Both claims are one hundred per cent frame-ups against the labor movement.
The auto workers through R.J. Thomas, president of the CIO-UAWA, were able to expose the fakery of the Chrysler slanders against labor. Similarly, the CIO was able to prove that the Navy Dept. was really trying to smash union conditions and the labor movement.
 
On Guard!
Surely, it is obvious that if the big corporations and the American military machine are willing to go in for strike-breaking before war, labor can expect nothing except ruthless suppression during war unless a terrific struggle doesn’t take place against this danger.
The strategy of the bosses and the military machine is quite simple: “National Defense” is only an excuse. In the name of national defense, strikes must be suppressed, wage cuts accepted, inhuman working conditions permitted. Otherwise the workers are “jeopardizing national defense.”
Under this slogan, and by fomenting and utilizing a patriotic feeling, the bosses hope to hog- tie the labor movement.
The military machine announces in advance that it will do more than its share to help in a union-busting campaign.
 
A Lesson from France
How this campaign will culminate in the complete suppression of the labor movement during war, if the bosses have their way, was revealed in another “democracy,” France, this week.
All labor is requisitioned through a special registration. He becomes a soldier in the factory, subject to military discipline. He cannot quit his job or leave it without official permission.
A worker may not refuse to accept any post to which he is ordered. He must work on holidays, with or without pay, as the government sees fit.
These are just the highlights of the new plan decreed by the government. In practice they mean no shop committee negotiations, no strikes, no sit-downs.
Labor is completely conscripted and all life, in the factory or out, is determined by the military machine, This is what French imperialist apologists still call “democracy.”
Would America in event of war be any different? Would labor be guaranteed its “democratic rights?” The attitude of the Navy department gives a clear answer. No! M-Day plans indicate that a course similar to that pursued in France is planned for American labor.
In making its present struggle against the plans of the bosses and the military machine, the CIO must learn soon that a really effective fight can ensue only if it is elevated to a higher plane: a struggle against imperialist war is the only guarantee that labor will not be hogtied in the future.
 



A strong opposition group is conducting a real fight against the Stalinist machine directed by Harold Pritchett which controls the International Woodworkers of America (CIO).
Pritchett is being opposed for re-election as president by Al Hartung, president of the Columbia River District Council, in a national referendum which will be completed on Dec. 2.
 
Loggers’ Indictment
The Opposition CIO Bloc, as it calls itself, presents an indictment against the Stalinist rule in a four-page leaflet entitled, What’s Wrong with the Present Administration of the IWA? It says:

Violation of the IWA constitution; malicious slander against members and officers for the purpose of purging all who hold honest differences of opinion; ignoring the trial procedure in the constitution; international officers disregarding charges placed against them, and insisting that when and if a trial is held they will sit on the jury trying their own cases.
 
Using the Communist Party machine to maintain themselves in office and put over their program. (Affidavits and abundant evidence is available for proof.)
 
They have used the Timber Worker to attack the IWA members without preferring charges or presenting evidence to justify such attacks. (See the Timber Worker for June 3, 10, 17, 24; April 29; August 27; etc.) Censorship against those who oppose the Communist machine.
 
They have failed to organize the unorganized: the Williamette Valley, Klamath Falls, The Redwoods and British Columbia, with their thousands of potential members. They reported membership in the IWA in 1937 of 100,000. They reported 100,000 members in 1939. The actual membership does not exceed 35,000.
 
Squandering the union funds for two years by putting on the Big Front without any means or membership to warrant it. The International Secretary has failed to make complete reports!
 
Dictatorial (Abe Muir) tactics. Witness Orton at Carnation: Pritchett at Tacoma and Portland. The rule of ruin career boys acting as floor leaders in district conventions.
 
From time to time mysterious appointments of new editors of the Timber Worker. New organizers without recommendation or approval of districts. Some of them were known Communist Party members.
 
Using the IWA as a front to build the Communist Party – on the members’ dues dollar.
 

Opposition’s Program
The Opposition CIO Bloc offers this as its counter-program:

Strict adherence to the CIO program. Political Action – Non-partisan. Drive out the political machine control within the union.
 
Organize the major sections of the lumber industry before moving out into the isolated districts.
 
Strict selection of organizers upon recommendation of the districts, based upon knowledge of the industry and ability to organize rather than political affiliation.
 
Furnishing accurate financial and membership standings to the membership.
 
Operate the International on a business-like basis. Eliminate the extravagant expenses.
 
Abide by the constitution.
 
Full Cooperation between the International, district, and local unions in securing the best wages, hours and working conditions for the membership.
 
Greater expression by the rank sind file. Extend the use of the referendum and initiative within the IWA.

Over one hundred delegates, almost a majority, at the recent thirdannual convention of the IWA signed this program. It represents atypical confused, but nevertheless progressive, movement as againstthe Stalinist machine.
The influence of the Wobblies is quite evident in the emphasis on"rank and filism.” They represent but one of thetendencies united in bitter opposition to the ruinous course pursuedby the Stalinists since this section of the labor movement was forcedout of the AFL and joined the CIO.
After breaking with the AFL Carpenters Union and its Czar, WilliamHutcheson, who sought to give the timber workers second classcitizenship in the union, the lumberjacks thought they would be ableto establish a militant, democratic union.
However, through Pritchett, a smooth operator, the Stalinistsmanaged to capture control of this union. For three years, varioustendencies appeared in opposition to the rule or ruin clique.
But not until this year were the various groups able to unitebehind a program which could rally the workers to fight the CPeffectively.
Harry Bridges, California CIO director (recently demoted) wasrushed by the Stalinists to the recent woodworkers convention to helphead off a revolt against the Pritchett machine. This was howprecarious the grip of the Stalinists had become.
The case of the Opposition CIO bloc against the Stalinists isborne out by all the available evidence. However, the oppositioncontains elements which can only be characterised as “redbaiting.”If the opposition is to become a genuine progressive force in thelabor movement, it must relegate this tendency into the background,and reject all opinions of that kind.
The opposition stands a very good chance of winning the nationalelections for which it has a full slate unless – as theopposition fears – something happens to the ballots or theStalinist- controlled locals are given inflated voting strength.
Other candidates of the opposition, all of whom are men of longexperience in this field, are: Les Cadieu, for vice-president; WorthLowry, for vice- president; H.I. Tucker for secretary-treasurer; andGeorge Brown for trustee.
 



The importance of labor unity is emphasized every time any kind of a meeting between CIO and AFL officials is reported in the press by the prominence given to those reports.
And when President Roosevelt’s conference with John L. Lewis and William Green was announced it naturally was given widest publicity. For this was a very important meeting.
Each week that brings Roosevelt’s determination to participate in the second world war to a stronger conviction, also emphasizes that the continued rivalry and struggle between the labor organizations disrupts the plans of the war machine. This has often been explained in previous columns in the Socialist Appeal.
Since “unofficial” intervention by Roosevelt through Madame Perkins brought no results, Roosevelt took the bull by the horns and summoned Lewis and Green to a conference.
 
Will Lewis Agree?
Proposals from the War Department to the CIO and the AFL on the role of unions in war time had been studied by the labor chieftains. A general picture of these proposals is given by Robert Bendiner in the current issue of The Nation.
“In the M-Day preview now showing before an exclusive audience of trade union executives, the program for labor is reliably held to look something like this: First an emergency period will be proclaimed, even before the declaration of war, during which the President will suspend the provisions of the Walsh-Healy Act, which requires the maintenance of specific labor standards in the manufacture of products bought by the federal government. During this period, and subsequently, the Employment Service, now removed from the jurisdiction of the Labor, Department and placed under the supervision of Paul V. McNutt, will become a key agency, geared to distribute and furnish adequate supplies of skilled labor to all war industries and to prevent its diversion into armed forces.”
 
War Dictatorship
Outright capitulation to these totalitarian – and shocking although not surprising – proposals of the War Department would sound the death knell of union independence, and expose Lewis and Green beyond all repair.
However, already a section of the AFL and the CIO leaders have accepted in principle the ideas of the militarists. The blast of the Navy Department against the CIO reflects its aggravation at the resistance it has thus far met from part of the top CIO circle.
Is it a wonder that Lewis entered the White House with trepidation? And that he was very silent after the conference, in marked contrast to his bombastic utterances after the conference last Spring with Roosevelt and Green?
Roosevelt talked cold turkey to the labor leaders at the conference last week. Last Spring he tried to use a big stick but it didn’t have much weight behind it. For that was in the pre-war period. Now Lewis and Green understand, if they had any doubts, the deadly seriousness of the Roosevelt demand for labor unity behind his war program.
Clubbing was not necessary for Green. He has indicated often enough that he is ready to serve as an agent of the war machine at any time. But Lewis has been a bad actor, as his Labor Day speech indicated. Lewis is more subject to rank and file pressure. His coolness and reluctance to the Roosevelt program has been obvious.
Now comes the big test. Will Lewis try to outdo Green? Seek to utilize the plans of the War Department to establish himself as the chief lieutenant of the Army within the labor movement? Or can the ranks of the CIO put on more pressure and force Lewis to resist the reactionary proposals of Roosevelt. Can the CIO call for labor unity against the war program, instead of being forced into a unity behind the program? This is the vital issue before the American labor movement today.
The future of the labor movement rests on its accepting the road of struggle against the Roosevelt war plans, uniting behind a program of militant action to preserve its liberties, advance Its organization, and obtain its rights in collective bargaining.
 



In a brief trip through the middle-west touching two industrial centers we were able to get first hand reactions to the effect of the new line of the Stalinists in the labor movement.
In those localities where the Stalinists have been confronted by progressive opposition, they are having a very embarrassing time trying to shift to the new line of “Keep America Out of Imperialist War.”
This is true despite the overwhelming sentiment of the workers against participation in war. For the workers just don’t trust the Stalinists like they used to.
For example, in one key CIO industrial union council, the Stalinists introduced a mild “keep America from being dragged into war” resolution.
Only a few weeks previously they had denounced a more clear-cut resolution against imperialist war as “Trotskyite-fascist.” And had succeeded in getting the resolution tabled.
You can imagine how the progressives and every other delegate to the council felt when the Stalinist spokesman read their resolution with the new line.
Jeers, razzing and a demand for an explanation of the new line came fast. Silence was the only answer. So a motion to table the Stalinist resolution was passed.
 
Nobody Taken In
Efforts to obtain an explanation from Stalinist delegates after the session were equally fruitless. Only embarrassed silence and a desire to be left alone!
The rule or ruin policy of the Stalinists has left too many deep scars for the advanced workers to forget and be taken in by the pseudo-“left” line.
One of the taunts which the Stalinists are now receiving from progressives is, “So you’re going Trotskyite, eh? Taking their position.” However, the differences between the S.W.P. with its long standing fight against imperialist war and the sudden phoney turn of the C.P. are pretty well defined in these areas and there isn’t much likelihood of serious confusion.
On the part of Stalinist ranks, if their attitude in union meetings is any criterion, the new turn came just in time to save them from complete demoralization and break up which threatened after the Stalin-Hitler pact was announced. A breath of life was injected temporarily in the dying corpse of Stalinism.
 



Fresh examples of how the labor bureaucracy becomes part and parcel of the war machine appear almost daily.
The Canadian section of the CIO announces its autonomy because it wants a completely free hand to aid the government for Britain.
The Canadian CIO leadership publicly declares it will do its part to help British imperialism keep over five hundred million colonial peoples in virtual slavery.
Chauvinism permeates the labor bureaucracy so deeply that it even wants to discard a semblance of internationalism expressed by the unity of the American and Canadian sections of the CIO.
 
Serve Masters
British and French labor leaders are doing their best in the service of their capitalist masters. A special committee headed by Sir Walter Citrine, prominent British faker, and Leon Jouhaux, French sell-out artist, are going to confer monthly to work out a close solidarity of the workers in these two countries behind the war machines.
Mr. William Green, president of the American Federation of Labor, doesn’t have to perform quite that openly yet for his masters. However, he is doing a fairly good job of warming up.
Naturally, Green would go after the militant workers who are fighting for their elementary rights, namely the autoworkers.
The crime of the CIO autoworkers, according to Green, is that they resorted to slow-down or sit-down strikes in protest against the terrific speed-up in the auto plants.
Of course, the effectiveness of the auto workers’ tactics and their solidarity are what Green is really objecting to.
But there is something much more insidious in Green’s blast against the auto workers. After all, he always opposed militant action.
Green’s criticism of the auto workers in reality is a bid to the American war machine for becoming “the outstanding labor leader in war time.” That is, Green says in so many words, if you played ball with us we guarantee there won’t be any strikes. We’ll keep labor pacified. The CIO leaders won’t.
The whole purpose of the Green statement is to express his willingness to be the agent of the bosses and the military machine during war-time.
These examples serve to indicate what revolutionists mean when they classify the labor bureaucracy as agents of the capitalist class.
 
But Not the Workers
The attitude of the rank and file, however, is different.
The attitude of the rank and file on the question of war is not given any vocal expression because of the censorship and persecution.
A hint of how the British workers are reacting is contained in a brief dispatch telling the story of a young worker who was called before a special court after refusing to be drafted.
“I am a slave of the capitalist system. It is their war, not the workers. I refuse to shoot down my fellow workers, even though you line me up against a wall and shoot me,” the worker declared.
How many other unknown heroes of the proletariat are there in England, France and Canada? They are the real voice of the proletariat. The labor bureaucrats merely repeat their master’s voice.
 



The Chrysler strike assumes greater and more significant proportions with every new development.
Last week, a CIO endorsed candidate defeated the incumbent Mayor Reading, labor-baiter, creating quite a stir in Detroit, center of the strike.
Of course, the new mayor is no labor man, and a raw deal can be expected from him in the long run, but the demonstration of labor’s potentialities at the polls had a good psychological effect on the strikers and the entire union movement.
 
Coughlin’s Move
This week interest was focused on the arrogant intervention of Father Coughlin, fascist demagogue, in the situation through a radio appeal to the strikers.
He had the nerve to suggest that the auto workers, after these many weeks of struggle, go back to work and let the sell-out artists of various mediation boards settle the dispute!
Of course Coughlin painted a glowing picture of the hardships of the unemployed, etc. but instead of blaming the Chrysler Corp. for its anti-union policy, Coughlin seeks to divide the union ranks, ruin the morale of the strikers, and turn the men into anti-unionists.
Coughlin revealed himself to be a 100 percent strikebreaker, scab, and fascist demagogue, once again by this latest move.
 
New Strikebreaking
It is very significant that the Chrysler Corp. had to use Coughlin as a stooge for its nefarious plans. First of all it demonstrates the power of the auto workers against all previous attempts to defeat the strike.
All the old baloney against strikers no longer gets anywhere in a city like Detroit with its many great struggles and experiences of the recent years.
The big industrialists have to turn to new and other means to smash labor – fascist methods and a fascist movement.
Today, Coughlin incites all those who listen to him against the union movement. Tomorrow, he will urge storm troopers to march through the picket line.
Coughlin’s attempt to foment religious hatred and utilize religious differences among the strikers received an immediate setback when the Detroit Branch of the Association of Catholic Trade Unionists challenged his statements.
Estimates have been made that the strike now involves over 150,000 workers, as the complete shutdown of Chrysler plants brought the closing of related parts plants, etc.
The “Union Shop” remains one of the major issues of difference, along with the many grievances of speed-up, etc. Under the “Union Shop” the employer may have the right to hire a non-union man but that after a 30-day probationary period the employee must join the union. Union men should insist that the “Union Shop” remain a cardinal point in neg0tiations, and resist every attempt to trade it away in negotiations.
* * *
Names to Remember
In reporting the action of the Canadian CIO to support the British and Canadian governments in the imperialist war, we did not publish the names of the people involved because they were reported in the last issue of the CIO News and they should be remembered by anti-war militants.
The Canadian national council of the CIO which made this sellout decision consists of: Silby Barrett, chairman; C.H. Millard, secretary; Sol Spivak, Amalgamated Clothing Workers; Harry Hunter, Steel Workers Organizing Committee; C.S. Jackson, United Electrical and Radio Workers; George Burt, United Automobile Workers; Tom Church, Mine, Mill and Smelter Workers; Joseph Mackenzie, United Rubber Workers; and Roger Irwin, Newspaper Guild.
D.W. Morrison, president of District 26 of the United Mine Workers represented the unions in the maritime provinces, and Robert Livett, International Board member of the UMWA represented those from western Canada.
 



One of the powerful men behind the scenes in the deadlocked negotiations between the C.I.O. and the A.F. of L. is Bill Hutcheson, czar of the Carpenters union. He is one of the main obstacles to labor unity as leader of the die-hard clique of reactionary craft unionists controlling the A.F. of L.
When Bill Hutcheson took a sock at John L. Lewis in the 1935 A.F. of L. convention during the discussion on industrial unionism, he was simply living up to his best traditions, that of a slugger. For Hutcheson’s career is one of the blackest in the American labor movement.
 
Expelled 75,000
His hatred of industrial unionism was revealed most clearly in the minutes of the 1936 Carpenters convention. Here it was that Hutcheson threw, out 75,000 timber workers because they wanted to become full-fledged members of the Carpenters union and because they endorsed the principles of the C.I.O.
Hutcheson gave them the privilege of paying dues in the Carpenters union but when they wanted to be represented at the convention, that was asking too much. And when the representatives of the timber, workers objected, Hutcheson’s right-hand men told them an economic boycott against timber firms employing the recalcitrant unionists would result.
Is it a wonder that in 1937 the timberworkers joined the C.I.O.? The bloody battle in the lumber camps last year between the C.I.O. and the A.F. of L. had its origin in the ruthless, dictatorial methods of Hutcheson in the 1936 convention.
Hutcheson is a Republican. His open alliance with the notorious Dupont-sponsored Liberty league was one of the scandals of the 1936 presidential election. He had an inside track on the post of Secretary of Labor if Al Landon had won.
Republican strategists in Washington are counting heavily on Hutcheson to swing a labor vote for them in the 1940 presidential elections, and a unified labor movement would make this more difficult. It is not at all excluded that Hutcheson would pull out of the A.F. of L. if it makes peace with the C.I.O.
Like all other labor bureaucrats and politicians in Washington he is playing for much higher stakes than only a dominant position in the union movement. Hutcheson visualizes himself as the fair-haired boy of a Republican regime in 1940, somewhat in the position that John L. Lewis once occupied with the Roosevelt regime.
And in Washington where only two subjects are on everyone’s mind – war and the 1940 elections – many authoritative observers feel that Hutcheson has a fair chance of achieving his aims.
Speaking of war, Hutcheson’s attitude was defined back in 1918 when he arbitrarily called off a strike of carpenters in the East Coast shipyards at President Wilson’s request. A membership demand for a vote on the question was tossed into the wastebasket.
 
A Fine Start
It was in New York in 1915 that Hutcheson, just elected president of the Brotherhood, gave his first major demonstration as a “business unionist.” Some 17,000 carpenters voted to fight for a fifty-cent daily wage increase. Negotiations succeeded in bringing this increase to 14,000 of them. A strike was called a few months later to extend the agreement to the other 3,000 men.
Just before the strike, Hutcheson demanded that it be called off. His order was disregarded. So he came to the city and signed an agreement with the employers that invalidated the fifty-cent increase for the 14,000 who had already won it!
Naturally the rank and file rejected the contract by a vote of over 11,000 to 100. Hutcheson retaliated by expelling 65 Locals with 17,000 members, and aided the employers to hire scabs on the jobs. Incidentally, in subsequent court action the employers testified that this service cost them $85,000!
However, the court action forced Hutcheson to reinstate the locals which had won the strike despite his scabbing!
He is a dangerous foe of labor unity. Let there be no mistake about it.
 



With the odds at 50–50 that war will break out this spring and 80–20 that it will begin by next fall, there isn’t much time left to prepare the union movement for the trials and tribulations ahead under war-time conditions.
A study of the events in America in the last world war give a clear picture of what can be expected tomorrow, and incidentally, shows how phoney the last war for “democracy” was.
 
Spearhead Against I.W.W.
It was inevitable that the spear-head of the bosses’ drive against; unionism should be concentrated on the I.W.W. with its militant traditions and unrelenting struggle for the oppressed.
Chief union strength of the I.W.W. was in the Lumber Workers of the Northwest, 30,000; the Metal Mine Workers, 40,000, primarily in the Rocky mountain and Minnesota and Michigan iron ore regions; the Agricultural Workers, 24,000 and others.
In the spring of 1917 a number of small lumber strikes developed under the inhumane conditions and low wages that made work unbearable. They spread in Idaho, Washington, Oregon and Montana.
The government reply to the strikes was quick in coming. Infantry troops from Oregon were sent to leading strike centers and a round up of all pickets began. A concentration camp was erected at Ellensburgh, Washington, where many strikers were held for months without any charge being placed against them!
Resentment aver this brutal treatment spread to other lumber centers, and combined with agitation for an eight-hour day and sanitary camp conditions, a strike of 50,000 lumberworkers in the rich timber belt of Puget Sound resulted.
 
Miners Strike
At this time the country was scandalized to read about a disastrous fire at the Speculator mine in Butte, Montana that took the lives of 260 miners. 14,000 miners went out on strike to obtain union control of safety appliances underground and the abolition of the blacklist.
The whole Northwest and West was seething with unrest It was then that the unionists got a real taste of the “democracy” for which American workers were losing their lives in Europe.
A vigilante “Loyalty League” in Jerome, Ariz., kidnapped 100 strikers and drove them out of the area. Police aided them by arresting the strikers after they were freed by the vigilantes.
In Bisbee, Ariz., 2,000 company officials, etc., armed with rifles, dragged 1,200 strikers from their beds early on July 12, 1917, and marched them to Lowell and other nearby cities, The strikers were corralled like cattle in railroad cars used for animals amid beatings, etc. and the murder of one striker.
After the train departed, U.S. soldiers took charge of it and put the strikers in an encampment at Columbus, N.M., where they stayed for over three months! Those who left and returned to the scene of the strike were arrested!
Company gunmen kidnapped Frank Little of the General Executive Board and hanged him on August 1, 1917!
 
Whip Up Lynch Spirit
Meanwhile, the press of the country, as emphasized in the study made public recently by John Hopkins University, was whipping up additional lynch spirit by seeking to tie the Wobblies to the “German-Huns.” All Wobblies were German spies, according to the newspaper headlines.
The hysteria aroused by this campaign created the basis for the nationwide raids, arrests, beatings and murder of the I.W.W. members. On September 5, 1917, almost every hall of the I.W.W. in the country was raided.
The convention of the Construction Workers Industrial Union, 15,000 strong, was busted up and forty-seven delegates arrested to be held for months without charges or trial.
While many of the lumber strikes were broken, the use of a modified “sit-down strike” tactic applied as “job action” by the strikers who were forced back to work secured the eight-hour day and improvement in the sanitary conditions!
 



An idea of the problems before the progressive railroad workers in this country and some of the proposals advanced to solve them is contained in a little printed pamphlet which was put out by the Minneapolis Railroad council in 1935. Although this is nearly four years old, the proposals have the freshness of new ideas and fit the bill in many respects.
“Why are the workers in the railroad industry kept divided into 21 separate labor organizations,” the pamphlet asks?
“How much does it cost the railroad men per year to maintain 21 organizations; 21 sets of officials; 21 journals; 21 conventions; 21 headquarters, and 21 sets of local lodge halls?” the pamphlet continues. Obviously this terrible and costly duplication still exists and needs to be remedied.
“Why does our present Brotherhood leadership have to censor our magazines and the Labor paper? And why do we have to maintain laws in our Brotherhood constitutions forbidding members to publish and circulate their own opinions?”
We want to remind our readers that the railroad union leadership which still maintains this kind of a stranglehold over its members professes to believe in “democracy.” In fact, it is perfectly willing to allow its members to die for “democracy” in another war.
 
Ask 6-Hour Day
Among the general demands raised by the progressives who published this pamphlet were:

For a six hour day without reduction in pay. It is interesting to note how this demand foreshadows part of our transitional program.
 
For two men on every locomotive for convenience and safety.
 
Against the consolidation of terminals unless it benefits the workers.
 
For an adequate retirement system. We can add that with the permanent technological and secular unemployment problem mentioned in a previous column this demand takes on special significance.
 
A joint national agreement between all legitimate railroad unions and all railroad companies. Of course, progress along this line has been noted but inadvertently through the compromise proposals, for example, adopted last fall with President Roosevelt’s intervention.
 
That all union demands be made jointly and backed by all the crafts.
 

Oppose Lobbying

That all demands be taken to the railroad companies direct and not taken to legislative bodies or the Interstate Commerce Commission. It hardly needs belaboring that the whole tendency of the union officialdom has been the opposite with the tragic effect of tying the railroad workers to the government machine.
 
That our present useless and expensive legislative boards and lobbies be abolished and that our Brotherhood leadership be requested to join with the rest of the labor movement for the building of a workers political party.

In explanation, it is pointed out that too many millions of the dues-payers’ money has been dumped into this useless lobbying process, most of which has landed in the pockets of the lobbyist, commonly known as “legislative representatives.”
The lobby simply cannot take the place of a good labor union, and it is time for us to quit the lobby and build the union by the united effort of the 21 crafts to amalgamate and organize the railroad workers, the pamphlet points out.
To which we can only add a hearty amen.
 



While the politicians in Washington are proceeding to carve out the life of the Wagner Labor Disputes Act, the National Labor Relations Board is ready to spring one of its most sensational hearings in the case of the United Rubber Workers of America against the Goodyear Tire & Rubber Co. of Akron, Ohio.
The amazing story of the development and the results of the sit-down strikes in the giant rubber plants in 1936 will be unfolded, and this is a subject on which both the company and the C.I.O. are extremely sensitive.
Neither side is anxious to have this hot potato occupy the center of the stage but it is inevitable. For it was in resisting the onsweep of the rubber worker through their effective sit-down strike that Goodyear earned its notorious reputation as a scab outfit.
The Ku Klux Klan, the Black Legion, the Goodyear Stahlmate Club and countless other anti-union organizations had mushroom growth and decline during this period while the Goodyear officials experimented to find a way of stopping union growth. Spies, stool-pigeons, Mr. Paul Bergoff himself, the Law and Order League, ex-Mayor C. Nelson Sparks and the war veterans – all the potential and fascist scum took a crack at breaking the union but still it established itself.
Bribing politicians, giving city policemen bonuses to club and tear gas union pickets, and every other conceivable method was used by the company to stop the rubber workers.
 
Headlines Are Due
In the revealing of this story before the N.L.R.B., America will get a concise picture of the whole story of the difficulties and problems that faced the C.I.O. in its early days.
Tom Girdler as a member of the Board of Directors of Goodyear, P.W. Litchfield, company president, Akron city officials and others should be in for some very unpleasant publicity.
The company will probably try to avoid the issues by the simple device of raising the cry of “revolution” and “Soviets” against the sit-downs of which quite a few dozen were pulled at Goodyear.
In particular, on May 20, 1936, Goodyear yelled that the workers formed a soviet at plant two when a group of cool-headed union committeemen took charge of the plant to prevent considerable bloodshed which threatened because of the provocations of company unionists and stooges.
Although 21 union men were arrested for “rioting” the frame-up charges were exposed and the union militants freed.
 
Boomerang Statements
Another time Cliff Slusser, vice-president of the company, got drunk and tried to get tough with union militants in the plant, according to the unionists, and he was ejected for his own good. Of course, this incident will be termed “insurrection” by the company.
There is no question but that an intelligent answer will stop the company’s counter-offensive when the hearings begin. Unfortunately, prominent union officials like John House, Goodyear Local president, and Stanley Denlinger, attorney for the U.R.W.A., have made some ill-advised statements on sit-downs, etc., and these can easily boomerang.
One thing is certain, however. For the first time in C.I.O. history, the whole story of sit-downs, etc. from every point of view is going to be told.
 



War-time brings with it a swift and never-ending rise in prices that shoots the worker’s cost of living sky high and makes his good union contract of today seem like an anchor to a low wage tomorrow.
During the world war, for example, the worker’s cost of living rose 70 per cent!
Since this actually meant a real wage cut of great proportions it is easy to understand Why there were 4,233 strikes in 1917 and 3,181 in 1918, with one-third of them being called to gain higher wages.
Over 80 per cent of the strikes were caused by purely economic causes (i.e., wages, hours and working conditions) While those called for union recognition, etc., were a very minor proportion.
The largest number of these war-time strikes occurred in the leading industrial areas – New York, Pennsylvania, Ohio and Illinois.
 
Possibilities Neglected
Here, indeed, was a perfect setting for a nation-wide union organization campaign that could have built the A.F.L. into a really powerful body.
Even without a carefully planned national campaign the A.F.L. grew from 2,072,702 in 1916 to 2,726,478 in 1918 and the seething unrest that swept the working class of the world in post war days reflected itself, among other ways, by the growth of the A.F.L. to 3,260,068 in 1919.
But the oil and steel industries were neglected to a great extent. Only 4,000 oil workers were enrolled in the A.F.L. while the Iron, Steel and Tin Workers union had an official membership of 19,700. Of course, the Machinists’ union in somewhat the same field grew from 100,900 to 254,600 in this period.
Not until the development of the C.I.O. was the mass production industrial worker in the key industries given a chance to join a union.
Properly utilized, the economic conditions during and after war-time could have been the lever to lift up the American union and working class movements to new heights of power, strength and progress.
 
Same Problems
Likewise, the facts of the strike struggles in war-time show that tomorrow union militants will have to face these problems, despite all efforts of the government war boards to settle grievances, etc. through arbitration or rulings. The class struggle cannot be legislated out of existence.
The job of building and maintaining a good progressive union does not stop with declaration of war. It becomes more difficult, in some respects, but in others, such as in the mood of the workers after the first flush of patriotism is over, conditions are not so difficult.
A study of the record of A.F.L. and C.I.O. top leaders (then in the A.F.L.) during the first world war shows that nothing can be expected from them in behalf of militant struggle for unionism in war-time. They all supported the imperialist slaughter.
The cowardice of these leaders was recently revealed again in the debate of the military (appropriations bill where amendments to assure union rates of pay on government contracts were thrown into the waste basket.
John L. Lewis and the C.I.O. leaders and William Green and his A.F.L. clique were very silent after the manufacturers’ lobby, aided by the Army and Navy lobbies, killed the section of the bill that might have given labor a few rights.
Time magazine put the whole question nicely in speaking of labor during war-time: “Leaders of the C.I.O. and A.F.L. know much but wisely say little of the lot of labor in war.”
The misery of the unemployed will be even greater, if that is conceivable, than it is now, and all that has been said ...

Note
1. In the currently available copy of this issue of Socialist Appeal the end of this article is missing. This will be replaced when we locate an undamaged copy.
 



The best labor paper in America.
It is this prospect for the twice-a-week Appeal that makes the present campaign so vital to every trade unionist in and near the Party. Already the Socialist Appeal has made its mark in the union movement with lively articles on burning issues before the labor movement. Now, we have the possibility of becoming a powerful influence through the medium of our twice-a-week Appeal.
Nothing succeeds like success. Our Party can and will make, I am confident, an impressive record in the labor movement, especially through the expansion of our press. It signifies a giant step forward in building a mass base in the working class. It means that the “Trotskyites” are not only “here to stay” but are on the march. In this period of confusion, indecision, and “muddling through” by the C.I.O. and A.F. of L. top leaderships, our steady advance on the road of revolutionary socialism will serve to draw all advanced union militants in our direction.
The twice-a-week Appeal with spot news on strikes, on general labor developments, on the national and international issues that face the workers today, can become the best-read labor paper in America. It must become indispensable to every union militant. And when we hear the unionists say, “I don’t agree with all the policies, but the Socialist Appeal certainly has the inside information and facts on everything, that’s why I read it,” then we know we will have broken through the ice and will be well on the road to a genuine mass proletarian party.
Build the Party in the unions through the twice-a-week Appeal!
 



(Concluded from last issue)
The C. I. O. convention in Massachusetts performed a remarkable feat in the anti-war resolution it approved. Remarkable not in the content of the resolution, but in the amazing “compromise” worked out by the majority of the delegates against the protests of a small progressive minority.
The resolution, as passed, said in the resolves, “that this convention records itself as being unalterably opposed to imperialistic war, to militarism ...” but the last clause of this same paragraph, “and to the preparations for war,” was deleted!
 
Strike Out Anti-War Paragraphs
This is no accident of confused workers thinking one way and voting another. For two other paragraphs in the resolution were also rejected. And they are extremely significant because they characterize the war.
They read: “in all the wars the working people make all the sacrifices at home and at the front in a cause not their own, while the employers reap all the profits,” and, “the same arguments are now being used for preparation for the coming war as were being used in 1918, such as making the world safe for democracy, government by consent of the governed.”
These paragraphs were stricken out by the resolutions committee after the resolution was submitted to them. On the floor, a small minority fought to have the original resolution passed but failed.
Compared to the stand of the national C.I.O. convention on another “war for democracy” the Massachusetts C.I.O. is far to the “left” in words but the failure to get specific and serious about fighting imperialist war by fighting war preparations reduces the convention stand to nothing.
Its value is solely that it gives progressive unionists a legal argument for continuing their anti-war propaganda within the unions basing themselves on the “stand” of the state C.I.O.
The Stalinists voted for the ambiguous and chopped up resolution. Salvatore Camelio, of the URWA, gave the cue for the Stalinists when he spoke against fighting war preparations. “We may be forced within a short time to defend ourselves against the fascist nations,” he declared in Daily Worker style.
 
Knife Unemployed Organization
The customary job of knifing any serious organization of the unemployed was done by the Stalinists. The organization committee of the convention unanimously approved a resolution calling for the organization of the unemployed into federal workers unions chartered by the C.I.O. on the basis of the following program. A federal works job for every worker not employed by private industry; union scale of wages and hours on WPA work.
The report of the committee was not brought to the floor until a half hour before adjournment There, Don Carson and John Poulos, Lynn labor leaders, put up a fight for passage of this vital resolution. The Stalinists attacked it as “stepping on the jurisdiction of the Workers Alliance,” and “changing national C.I.O. policy.”
We’ve often wondered who gave the Workers Alliance its so-called jurisdiction? Earl Browder? As for national C.I.O. policy, David Lasser has moved heaven and earth to get a C.I.O. national charter and John L. Lewis has cold-shouldered him. Both arguments of the Stalinists are completely phoney. Well, the resolution was referred to the incoming executive board which is supposed to kill it, if the Stalinists get their way.
 
“They’re Trotskyists”
Better cooperation beforehand by all progressives could have brought a different result. It takes more than indignation to smash the influence of the Stalinist wrecking machine.
Of course, Michael Widman, of the United Mine Workers who was re-elected chairman of the state organization, can hardly be called a friend of the Stalinists. Quite the contrary; and this should assist in putting the dampers on their ambitious plans to capture the entire state organizations.
Perhaps one of the surprising – to the delegates involved – lessons of the convention was to discover that they were “Trotskyists!” Each time dozens of delegates voted for a progressive idea of any kind, the Stalinists passed the rumor around, “They’re Trotskyists!”
 



The attitude of the railroad brotherhoods towards the proposal of an American Congress of Labor, which was rejected by the A.F. of L., has not been given much attention. As a matter of fact, so little is known about the railroad unions, especially among the newer C.I.O. unionists, that we herewith report briefly on them.
The “Big Four” brotherhoods which John L. Lewis wanted to hold the balance of power in the proposed A.C. of L. comprise more than 300,000 railroad workers
Largest of these is the Brotherhood of Railroad Trainmen with 134,000 members, according to A.F. Whitney, its president. He, by the way, is a New Dealer who plays ball with the Stalinists on occasions. We remember how he used his prestige to sneak a representative of the League .for Peace and Democracy (the Stalinist war-mongering outfit) into the United Rubber Workers convention in 1937.
 
Wealthiest Labor Bureaucracy in Country
The Brotherhood of Locomotive Engineers, of which Alvanley Johnston is president, estimates its membership at 60,000. It is the oldest of the Big Four, since it was founded in 1863.
An estimated 78,000 members belong to the Brotherhood of Locomotive Firemen and Enginemen. It is headed by the smooth Mr. D.B. Robertson.
The fourth of the big unions, which actually operate the trains as distinguished from the “shop crafts,” is the Order of Railway Conductors with between 35,000 to 40,000 members J.A. Phillips is president.
It is considered very unlikely that these “Big Four” will give up their independence, although repeated efforts have already been made behind the scenes by both the C.I.O. and the A.F. of L. to win them over
These operating unions represent mainly the engineers, firemen, conductors, brakemen, switchmen and flagmen. They often have jurisdictional disputes, for their claims to membership overlap one another. The duplication of officials, etc., has created perhaps the largest and wealthiest labor bureaucracy in the country. Railroad union conventions are notorious for their length. Usually delegates get all expenses and good pay while attending. We recall one convention held in Cleveland that lasted over two months!
 
Employment and Wages Drop
In contrast to the “Casey Jones” are the “shop crafts” mentioned before. There are 17 of these, which have affiliation to the A.F. of L. The leaders of all the railroad unions except the trainmen got together in 1926 and formed the Railway Labor Executives Union to work unitedly on wage problems, etc. The Brotherhood of Trainmen cooperates closely with this committee of which George M. Harrison, president of the A.F. of L, Brotherhood of Railway and Steamship Clerks, Freight Handlers, Express and Station Employees, is chairman.
Among the main problems facing the railroad workers is the steady increase in unemployment. In the past year, for example, over 100,000 railroad workers on class one lines have lost their jobs, according to the U.S. Department of Labor. About 943,000 are employed by the class one railway systems now, exclusive of executives, officials and staff assistants.
Wages in the industry averaged $24.24 a week in December 1938, the latest obtainable figure.
 
Renounce Militancy
While once the railroad workers, led by Eugene V. Debs, through the now defunct American Railway Union pulled the great and historic Pullman Strike in 1894 and established a new high note in labor militancy, strikes today are shunned like the very devil. The Transportation Act of 1929 set up government mediation, and this was succeeded in 1926 by the Railway Labor Act, which together with its amendments passed in 1934 makes it a long-drawn out and tedious process of negotiations under which strikes are “illegal”
Perhaps the conservatism of the railroad union bureaucracy was never better expressed than in a recent statement by Whitney. “In the early days we took the position that we would protect our contracts, regardless of whether they suited the rank and file at the moment, ... our members are well disciplined,” etc., etc.
 



Conspicuous by their absence from the C.I.O.’s proposals to the A.F. of L. were two important considerations.
In the first place, the C.I.O. proposals threatened to create a new “forgotten man” in the labor movement. None other than David Dubinsky, president of the International Ladies Garment Workers’ Union. John L. Lewis probably took great personal satisfaction in snubbing Dubinsky in the proposals for peace in the union movement. Dubinsky’s feelings when he read about the proposed convention of the A.F. of L., the C.I.O. and the railroad unions without mention of his powerful independent union can easily be imagined.
However, Dubinsky and the I.L.G.W.U. cannot be counted out as easily as Lewis would like. Any peace between the C.I.O. and the A.F. of L. in regard to the clothing industry that doesn’t include the I.L.G.W.U. simply won’t matter.
 
No Guarantees for Industrial Unionism
In the second place, the C.I.O. committee did not ask for any guarantees for industrial unionism in the mass production industries. Since this was the original bone of contention in the labor movement, the omission is very revealing on how the nature of the struggle and the split in the union movement has changed character.
Lewis did not leave that out because he is going to give up industrial unionism. Not at all. Industrial unionism is an accepted fact. Not even the most reactionary A.F. of L. negotiator would seriously propose craft unionism for the mass production unions. The A.F. of L. committee already has stated its willingness to recognize industrial unionism in major industries. The addition of Dan Tobin, as we pointed out in the previous column, helps industrial unionism in this respect.
The C.I.O. wants equality with the A.F. of L. in the new union movement. Or to be more specific, Lewis wants to dominate the new American Congress of Labor (if his proposals are carried) through the friendship of the railroad brotherhoods who would hold the balance of power.
Of course, the A.F. of L. leaders also want to control the united labor movement. That is why they rejected the C.LO. proposals. The question of which bureaucracy shall dominate is playing a very large role in tne present negotiations.
 
Keeps Faith with Stalinists
It is tragic that the C.I.O. was not able to sweep forward to greater victories after the auto strikes and the signing of the steel contracts. Replacement ol the A.F. of L. by a new and larger union movement based on the mass workers would have been a great advance for the American workers. Unfortunately, this did not happen. Between Lewis and his Stalinist allies enough mistakes were made to slow down and finally stop the growth of the C.I.O.
Lewis proposes the inclusion of certain C.I.O. craft unions in the new set-up. This indicates he is keeping faith with his Stalinist allies who control those unions and want to enter the new union movement on the ground floor.
 
Only Labor Can Achieve Its Own Unity
Perhaps the most popular and most dangerous part of the C.I.O. proposals was that President Roosevelt be chairman of the unification convention. In its own way it is a confession of bankrupt union leadership to ask for outside intervention. It would give Roosevelt an unparalleled opportunity to swing the entire labor movement behind his war program. Although we haven’t seen the Daily Worker because it is not obtainable in the backwoods, we are confident that this proposal was hailed with great hozzanas!
The C.I.O. proposal to have the U.S. Department of Labor act as mediator “on all controversial questions affecting overlapping jurisdiction or other matters between the constituent unions of the Congress,” is a dangerous attempt to hog-tie the entire union movement to the government. It would place a chain around the free and independent action of the unions, and should be rejected.
Lasting labor unity with benefit to the workers can come only through the unions ironing out their own differences.
 



A typical C.I.O. state convention was held recently in Massachusetts. It had, however, some extremely important nuances of differences that make it worth analysis.
For example, a resolution condemning Coughlin for his Nazi and anti-labor activities passed only by a narrow margin! No one to be sure, took the floor and openly defended Coughlin. But the vote was eloquent testimony of the danger of Coughlin’s influence. It permeates the organized labor movement.
The Stalinists were put neatly on the spot by the introduction of the anti-Coughlin resolution. They had tried to slander certain progressive union leaders as “Coughlinite agents,” and had to eat their own words when these union leaders introduced the anti-Couglin resolution!
Symbolic of the changes within the C.I.O. during the past year was the fact that the total number of delegates to this convention was 263. Last year there were 484.
 
Theme Song Is “Save Wagner Act!”
The problem of maintaining and organizing unions received insufficient attention at the convention. Little mention was made of the decline in delegates, a reflection of the status of the unions.
The theme song of the convention was “Save the Wagner Act!’ John Brophy, director of the C.I.O., James B. Carey, secretary of C.I.O., William J. Hynes, John L. Lewis’ personal representative, and Joseph Schlossberg of the Amalgamated Clothing Workers spoke on the subject. It hardly needs belaboring that all of them said the same thing. The fight for the Wagner Act is an extremely important one. It must be won. But to occupy half the convention with speeches on the subject means to neglect other burning issues. This happened.
All the speech-making becomes a form of filibuster. It takes too much time of a two day convention. This is typical of state C.I.O. conventions.
Eli P. Oliver, head of Labor’s Non-Partisan League, was enthusiastically received by the delegates. His blast against Senator Walsh of Massachusetts who is sponsoring reactionary amendments to the Wagner Act was cheered heartily. Nothing was said about independent labor politics, and no resolutions on the subject reached the floor. In this, the convention was a miniature of the national C.I.O. Convention.
 
C.I.O. Democracy Disputed
We find it very significant that the only serious dispute at the convention was over the question of more democracy within the C.I..O set-up.
A group of delegates from Worcester introduced a resolution on the selection of vice-presidents who make up the executive board The resolution called for six members of the executive board to be “rank and filers!” That is, delegates who were not on the payroll of any national or international union, though it did not exclude business agents or those directly answerable to local unions.
The discussion got hot. Michael Widman, chairman of the C.I.O. and a U.M.W.A. official, spoke emphatically on this point. The Stalinists swung behind him, and the resolution lost by a large majority.
Other C.I.O. state conventions have had similar controversies. It is a manifestation of the rank and file suspicion and concern over the C.I.O. set-up.
Blast at A.F.L.
Unlike most C.I.O. meetings, this one began with a bitter blast against A.F. of L. officials in Massachusetts by Thomas F. Burns, U.R.WA. vice-president. Burns didn’t pull any punches in talking about the record of John F. Gatelee, former president of the Massachusetts Federation of Labor. He branded Gatelee a racketeer and an organizer of violence. Usually, a conciliatory speech towards the A.F. of L. features a C.I.O. convention. In many localities in Massachusetts, there is a working agreement between the two organizations, however.
Significant too, there was no resolution passed calling for a third term for Roosevelt.
(Continued next issue)
 



When Dan Tobin, president of the powerful teamsters union, resigned from the A.F. of L. negotiation committee for peace with the C.I.O., Louis Stark, labor reporter of the N.Y. Times wrote, “His action came as a surprise to Administration leaders who regarded it as akin to a calamity.
It was a definite set-back to hopes of early labor peace. Tobin, as leader of the largest and strongest A.F. of L. union, was a key person in unity negotiations. The A.F. of L. committee of Thomas Ricket, Matthew Woll, and Harry Bates, is composed of “front men.” None of them wield any real power in the A.F. of L. Why Tobin resigned is a matter of great importance to progressive trade unionists interested in a united labor movement. Certainly, he is hardly more busy than other union chieftains and this reason was only an excuse.
 
Believes Lewis Is Opposed to Unity
Actually, Tobin’s attitude on unity of the C.I.O. and A.F. of L. has changed considerably since his blast at the A.F. of L. council’s reactionary stand at the last convention of the Federation. Tobin’s strong plea for a more conciliatory attitude towards the C.I.O. gave impetus to the trend towards unity.
However, his private conversations with Roosevelt administration officials and with C.I.O. top leaders apparently have changed his mind on the position of the C.I.O. towards unity. At the recent quarterly meeting of the A.F. of L. executive council Tobin told reporters he had no intention of pulling out of the A.F. of L. At the convention, Tobin had hinted at some such action.
Not so long ago, Tobin made a very significant statement when interviewed by Cal Tinney of the N.Y. Post. Tobin blamed top C.I.O. leaders for the failure of peace negotiations!
Authoritative reports from Washington say that Tobin now has gone a step further. He evidently blames John L. Lewis personally for an incorrect and intransigent attitude towards the A.F. of L. which has made negotiations infinitely more difficult. That is why Tobin refused to be put on the spot as a “negotiator”! His resignation move evidently is intended to force Roosevelt to put more pressure on Lewis in the negotiations!
 
The Daily Worker Protests Too Much
If Tobin again joins the A.F. of L. committee, it would in our opinion signify his belief that some of the obstacles placed by Lewis on unity negotiations had been removed. It goes without saying that the difficulties with the “diehard” clique in the A.F. of L. are perhaps a greater problem.
There is another story circulating the rounds of A.F. of L, circles in Washington that is extremely interesting. It says that Lewis wants not only a guarantee for industrial unionism in mass production industries (which Tobin and others are ready to grant) but also protection of the C.I.O. craft unions (office workers, etc.) under pressure of the Stalinists who control that segment of the C.I.O.
Is this why the Daily Worker so vehemently denied last week the “charge that Communists are against labor unity”? Methinks you protest too much, Messrs. Browder and Hathaway. There is little doubt that the A.F. of L. will demand from the C.I.O. as one of the conditions of unity that Lewis dump the Stalinists. In view of this fact, one can expect open moves by the Stalinists to sabotage unity negotiations.
President Roosevelt’s open intervention in the union dispute arises from two convictions. (1) He believes European war with American participation is rapidly coming and he therefore wants national unity here which means above all peace and abject servility of the labor movement, and (2) He knows the rank and file in both the A.F. of L. and the C.I.O. wants peace and he thinks he can strengthen his hold over the working people by posing as the “champion of labor peace.”
However, the practical difficulties confronting the unity negotiations such as the wide differences on the Wagner Act and on Labor’s Non-Partisan League, to mention two main obstacles, will not easily be resolved.
 



The C.I.O. leaders are getting a bitter taste of what’s going to happen to the union movement in the coming world war which they voted to support at the C.I.O. convention last fall. And the Roosevelt administration is doing a beautiful job of sticking a knife into the back of the C.I.O. under the guise of “serving the best interests of national defense.”
This situation came into the limelight with the dispute in Senate over the $358,000,000 emergency army expansion bill. It seemed that John L. Lewis wanted provisions in the bill which would guarantee that no contracts would be given manufacturers who violated the Wagner Labor Disputes Act.
Lewis thought he wasn’t asking too much for labor which, after all, has to shed all the blood in war while the industrialists get richer.
 
Lewis Gave Manufacturers a Loophole
However, the National Association of Manufacturers saw a loophole in the Wagner Act administration in the fact that Lewis wanted a special law saying it pertained to industry engaged in national defense work. So it obtained the aid of the War Department (a non-political body, you understand) and they put the heat on the Senate committee, so that now the Lewis demand which Barkley, Democratic whip, promised to support has been emasculated.
The Senate is going to work out a “compromise.” Press reports say, “the compromise would permit discrimination (note the choice of words) only against firms that had been held guilty of Wagner Act violations within two years prior to awarding of the contract”
“A second provision would permit the President to issue a proclamation exempting any firm from the amendments provisions if he deems such action in the best interests of national defense.”
Such a compromise formula which is backed by Roosevelt gives the manufacturers a legal loophole from observing any of the provisions of the Wagner Act.
“Defense” Is a Weapon Against Labor
Only a few weeks ago the C.I.O. protested against the failure of steel manufacturers engaged in building armaments to pay the wages provided for under the Walsh-Healy Act which we explained in a recent column.
The manufacturers are chiseling there, too. “Requirements of national defense are so imperative that we can not meet the provisions of the Walsh-Healy Act and give the government loyal and immediate service,” the steel barons say.
Summed up in a few words, the manufacturers see another powerful weapon in their hands against the union movement with the adoption of the various defense measures.
And Mr. Roosevelt, who rides roughshod over the Army and Navy to sell airplanes to France, says not one word of criticism against the combined Army-Navy and munitions maker lobby which is squeezing labor to make more blood profits. In fact, Roosevelt supports the manufacturers in their drive against unionism in steel and other basic industries.
One can expect steps soon to outlaw all strikes in industries engaged in building ships, or war material of any kind under the claim that this is “treason against the national defense.” And workers who protest against inhuman conditions and low wages and discrimination against union men will be branded “agents of a foreign power!”
The strategy of the manufacturers is to make it a serious crime for any worker or group of workers to fight for unionism and all that it means in better wages, hours and working conditions as a “jeopardy to national defense” and at the same time make it a crime to interfere in the slightest way with their insatiable thirst for profits, under the guise of “fatal interference with industry engaged in national defense work!”
 



An ominous hint of days to come in America was furnished in the past few weeks by the food profiteering racket which swept the country.
In many cities sugar could not be purchased or else it was available in such small quantities that they were negligible.
“I’m sorry but we’re out of sugar,” was the grocer’s reply to a housewife’s demand for a pound. And if she did succeed in getting a pound, the price was increased plenty.
 
Same Everywhere
One big industrial center was “out of sugar” for two days. In another city we visited, the restaurants only a few days ago served you two lumps of sugar. None was available at the tables.
It seemed fantastic to have housewives tell us that they couldn’t buy flour at some of the big stores!
This same thing happened everywhere in America. All food prices rose. And they still are going up, despite the fine talk of threats against the profiteers.
 
Warehouses Full
Yet there isn’t any shortage of sugar, or flour or other food.
The warehouses are full. The government is still paying farmers millions of dollars to destroy crops or to fail to produce them.
The rise in prices was a deliberate, cheap, chiseling move sponsored mainly by large companies to take advantage of the wave of worry that followed the declaration of war in Europe.
Scandals surrounding the rise in food prices were so smelly that wide-spread protests quickly arose. And Mr. Frank Murphy, attorney general of the U.S.A., took a few minutes time out from trying to frame the Minneapolis workers to issue a blast against food profiteering.
Of course, he’s too busy trying to break the spirit of the Minneapolis workers to go after the war profiteers.
The labor movement responded immediately to the new pressure against its already poor living standards. The United Textile Workers, the Akron C.I.O. council, and numerous other labor bodies are demanding a federal investigation of food prices.
 
Living Standards Lowered
In the brief space of two weeks the living standards of the American people were reduced between 10 to 20 per cent because of the rise in prices.
The WPA workers took another cut because the groceries bills are getting higher for the same amount of food they must purchase ... and it was tough going before.
The squeeze play is on. War preparations mean the continued subjugation of the union movement. No strikes for higher wages, if the bosses have their way. And at the same time, the rising prices cut down the amount the workers can buy.
The first act in the tragedy of war has begun. The food profiteering was a sort of “dress rehearsal.”
 



The deeply rooted anti-war sentiment of the masses of people reflected itself in the mass meetings on the war crisis and the Stalin-Hitler Pact which I addressed in the Middle West last week.
It was an inspiration to see the many new faces at the mass meetings in Akron, Youngstown and Cleveland.
Two leading Stalinists attended the Akron meeting, and asked sympathetic questions. In Youngstown a new group of workers listened attentively when Roosevelt’s war aims at their expense were exposed.
New headquarters in Cleveland furnished a good background for delivering an anti-war talk to the audience of nearly 100 people. Roosevelt’s emergency proclamation had been headlined in every newspaper just before that meeting and the impact of this event could be felt among the people.
“What can we do to stop war? To keep America out of War? To keep from going to Europe to fight?” These questions were paramount in everyone’s mind as radio bulletin after bulletin brought the latest moves to the imperialist war.
Party Mobilizing
Although the meetings were arranged at very quick notice, the fine work done by the branches was a significant indication of how the party ranks are determined to fight unceasingly against war.
Of course, there was the moment of shock felt by everyone when the bloody spectacle of mass murder, destruction, and pestilence unfolded before the world. The ghastly nightmare had become the reality.
Perhaps the bitterest comments against war came from the women in the audiences. Women whose husbands or sons face the prospect of death while Wall Street sucks the profit out of their blood.
Significantly, while many asked questions on various aspects of the Socialist Workers Party program, one fact was accepted by all – the Socialist Workers Party is the only anti-war Party in America.
 



Another indication of the depth of the break between John L. Lewis, CIO chairman, and President Roosevelt over both domestic and foreign policy was furnished last week at the United Rubber Workers of America convention.
It was revealed in the speech of Eli P. Oliver, executive vice-president of Labor’s Non-Partisan League, and Lewis henchman, on the 1940 elections.
Oliver spoke of the need for a “progressive” president but very pointedly did not mention Roosevelt’s name, although just before he talked the convention had endorsed Roosevelt for a third term!
This incident exposed completely the utter stupidity of Lewis’ “realistic” politics. Lewis spent so much time placing the CIO behind Roosevelt in the last six years that Lewis is now unable to shift the position of the CIO easily. (Even Phillip Murray and Sidney Hillman didn’t like his labor day speech.)
Besides, the U.R.W.A. convention endorsed Roosevelt mainly because of a rabble-rousing speech by Michael Quill, Stalinist president of the Transport Workers Union, a guest speaker at the sessions.
The chief opponent within the CIO of a break with the Roosevelt administration will be the Stalinists. Lewis’ allies of yesterday become his opponents of today. And Lewis is really going to pay for the way he allowed the Stalinists to run wild within the CIO, disrupting union after union, capturing control of key unions, etc.
The expected removal of Elmer Andrews as Wages and Hours Administrator to be replaced by an army officer is another blow at the CIO by Roosevelt. It means no enforcement of the wages and hours provisions.
John L. Lewis understands too well that the New Deal has become the War Deal. That is one reason why he is paving the way for a public break with Roosevelt at the coming CIO national convention.
The famous Labor Day address of Lewis showed that he understood the strategy of Roosevelt’s war deal. Yet Lewis is caught in a terrible dilemma for a labor bureaucrat from which there is no escape, except turning sharply to the left, and this is most improbable.
After spending 30 years as a labor bureaucrat, after supporting the first world war to make the world safe for democracy, after living the luxurious life of a Washington gentleman, and after preaching the glories of American “democracy” to his followers, Lewis can hardly be expected suddenly to become a Eugene V. Debs.
The powerful pressure of the CIO rank and file which wants no part of a “foreign war,” and the dangers to Lewis’ own position in war time caused the Labor Day speech against “meddling in Europe.”
But what does Lewis propose? A break With Roosevelt? Fine. But where will the CIO go?
Already Lewis has sent out a “feeler” to the effect that he was going to support Senator Wheeler for president in 1940. A deal with the Republicans?
What will that solve? How will war be stopped by that maneuver? Utterly futile!
It is up to the ranks of the CIO to force Lewis to quit playing Hamlet. The coming convention can do a tremendous job towards slowing down the march to war by demanding a popular referendum on war, and by announcing its determination to run a labor candidate for president in 1940.
Lewis is incapable of solving even his own dilemmas.
 



The general flare-up of seamen throughout the world against sailing in war zones unless given bonuses and special insurance marks a new stage in labor’s struggle to prevent all war burdens from falling on its shoulders.
Recently, ship owners took as a matter of course the announcements of underwriters that all insurance rates would be boosted tremendously for all craft shipping in danger zones. Property must be protected.
A similar demand for adequate protection of human beings on these ships was distinctly disregarded by the operators. Crews of Irish, British, Dutch and American ships were forced to tie up the vessels in order to obtain even a consideration of their demands.
 
Refuse to Sail
In America, seven liners were tied up by members of the National Martime Union who refused to sail for Europe unless their demands were met.
The sympathetic strike of British sailors and the complete tie-up of all ships involved gave promise of a real victory for the NMU despite government attempts of intimidation against strikers through false arrests.
However, the NMU officials are dominated by the Stalinist fakers, and a poor compromise agreement resulted which has intensified rank and file dissatisfaction and resentment.
So strong is the feeling of the NMU ranks that Curran and company are finding it difficult to get crews for the ships. The men just won’t sign up under the terms negotiated by Curran. This boycott is what the newspapers have been calling a “shortage of labor.”
Original demands of the NMU included $250 a month bonus, $25,000 insurance, a 40 per cent increase in personnel.
When Joe Curran got through negotiating for the strikers, they sailed with a 25 per cent increase in wages, payment of up to $150 for possessions lost if the ship sinks, continuation of pay in event of internment in a foreign country, and a promise to negotiate on the main demands.
After the ship owners had stalled for over a month on these demands, and the ships are out at sea, one can hardly expect them to suddenly capitulate to the NMU demands, especially since Curran did not obtain an agreement that the terms of any settlement would be retroactive.
As usual, the real fight for maintaining the union conditions and protecting the interests of the American seamen will fall on the Sailors Union of the Pacific.
The SUP enters this battle with its militant banner waving high over the victory it achieved against the Maritime Commission and its fink halls.
Despite all federal government threats and maneuvers, Maritime Commission ships sailed last week with full crews out of the SUP hall! “You can’t fight the government,” Curran and his Stalinist henchmen told the seamen of America when the fink hall issue arose. “We’ll protect our hiring hall rights,” Harry Lundeberg, secretary-treasurer of the SUP replied, backed by this militant union.
Is it a wonder that government officials are taking the SUP demands for bonuses and insurance ten times more seriously than all the speeches of Curran and company?
The SUP demands, voted by the membership on a coastwise scale, include: A 100 per cent increase in wages and overtime for crews on ships sailing to and from ports in war zones; on those vessels carrying munitions and contraband, the wages shall be the standard West Coast scale, plus 200 per cent increase; a $10,000 life insurance policy; $25,000 cash for permanent disability; $250 for loss of clothing; wages if interned; transportation expenses if occasion demands; and an increase in personnel.
The state department was asked to give its interpretation of war zones, and negotiations with the Matson line, which sends ships to Australia, have begun.
While the SUP begins negotiating with the usual handicap of combating the lower standard agreements that Curran and the NMU crowd sign, the whole tradition and superior conditions of the West Coast Sailors are a good indication that once again the SUP will come through with a victory for the American seamen.
 



The conventions of the AFL and the CIO called for early in October assume historic significance because Congress will be in session on the war question at the same time.
Many a Washington politician is not going to cast his vote for or against Roosevelt’s war policies until he sees what the labor movement has to say.
 
Many Issues
War! That is the burning issue before the delegates to the two conventions. For or against the Roosevelt war program. For or against a people’s referendum on war.
Labor unity! Will it take the form of a united front against war and its menace to Organized Labor or will it be a unity with the Army and Navy to hogtie the unions to the military machine?
Roosevelt? Will the man who turned the New Deal into the War Deal be repudiated or is labor going to put its stamp of approval via a third term endorsement on its chief opponent?
While both conventions face many other important problems, these three questions are the decisive issues. Recent events give a fairly accurate forecast of how labor will give its answers.
 
Stalinist Turn
The new turn of the Stalinists (“Keep America Out of Imperialist War”) already has been felt in the labor movement. The New Haven Central Labor Union adopted the new line which includes ducking the neutrality issue as presented to Congress.
The American Federation of Hosiery Workers, CIO, rejected a resolution endorsing Roosevelt’s “peace policy,” and adopted the new C.P. line of “Keep Out of Imperialist War,” and for “true neutrality.”
Evasion of the fundamental problem of fighting against the war policies of Roosevelt is the essence of the new Stalinist treachery. It will carry much weight at the CIO convention because of the strength of the Stalinists in those unions.
 
Lewis Silent
The decision of the CIO convention, however, rests primarily on John L. Lewis and the top bureaucracy. Outside of his Labor Day blast Lewis has been silent. Perhaps he is waiting for the CIO convention to give his views a more authoritative backing?
Present indications are that Lewis will follow along the same lines of his Labor Day speech. His criticism of Roosevelt for spending sleepless nights worrying about entangling America in a foreign war while the unemployed starve at home probably will result in a convention decision against a change in the neutrality law.
Since the AFL top leadership has had a “more friendly ear” at the White House than the CIO in recent months, William Green and the AFL executive council will be more receptive to support of Roosevelt’s war program.
 
Obstacles
But they face an obstacle that will be very difficult to overcome. The Minnesota Federation of Labor convention went on record for a people’s referendum on war. Passage of a similar resolution at the national convention would constitute a heavy blow to Roosevelt’s war aims.
Let the People Vote on War! This rallying cry from the AFL and CIO conventions would gather whirlwind speed and support throughout the country. It would put a serious crimp in Roosevelt’s style.
 
Unity Prospects
Prospects for labor unity of any kind are less than they were a year ago. The AFL leaders think the CIO is rapidly disintegrating. Let time solve the problem.
John L. Lewis hasn’t even made a gesture towards reopening unity negotiations which were postponed at his suggestion during the coal strike last spring.
Roosevelt is pushing for a reactionary unity behind the war machine. The rank and file in both camps want unity but its voice has not been powerful enough yet to force a progressive unity.
Unity in action against M-day; against emasculation of the unions; against the de facto repeal of the wages and hours law and the Wagner act; against war profiteering; this kind of unity must emerge from the conventions. It will come only from rank and file pressure.
All the ballyhoo in the world can not keep the terrible tragedy of unemployment from demanding attention at the conventions. Will the unemployment problem be “solved” by sending millions to European trenches, or will all war funds go to the unemployed?
 
A Job for Delegates
The sniveling attitude of Lewis and company in begging for a labor representative on the War Board shows that any serious action will not come from them. It’s a job for the delegates.
A third term for Roosevelt was the usual stand of many labor conventions, both CIO and AFL. However, recent events changed this situation somewhat.
 
Rebuke Roosevelt
The New York State Federation of Labor very deliberately avoided a vote on that question as a rebuke to Roosevelt for his WPA wage cuts. There is much sentiment of that kind in the AFL. The executive council has always been divided on support of Roosevelt. A Republican wing headed by William Hutchinson of the Carpenters union, has other reactionary ideas.
From every point of view, this is one question on which the AFL convention will find itself divided. If a progressive wing develops at the convention capable of clearing through the muddle-headed thinking, repudiation of Roosevelt as a war-monger and anti-labor politician can become a reality.
 
Lewis Changes Tune
John L. Lewis recently changed his tune in regard to Roosevelt, as we outlined in a previous column. No longer is it the policy of the top CIO leaders to call for an unqualified endorsement of Roosevelt for a third term.
The Transport Workers Union convention, Stalinist-directed, last week passed a resolution giving the new line. For a president who carries out New Deal policies. No direct endorsement of Roosevelt! It’s the same line that Eli P. Oliver, executive vice-president of Labor’s Non-Partisan League, gave to the United Rubber Workers convention.
But will the CIO convention break with all capitalist politicians. Will it call for a labor candidate for president on a “Down with the War” program! On this decision rests the future of the CIO and the entire Labor Movement.
 



Green Repeats
It isn’t taking long for the conservative American labor leaders to show their true colors in the war crisis.
William Green, AFL president came out this week for the slogan “Let the People Vote on War.” ONLY, he was talking about Germany!
The German people don’t want war, Let Hitler let them vote and they’d all vote for peace, Green says. Correct!
But how about setting a fine example for them? How about Mr. Green shouting “Let the People Vote on War in the United States!” Green is as silent on this as Hitler is in Germany. If it’s a democratic right of the people of Germany to vote on war, why isn’t it for the American people? We say it is.
Green’s actions show that he is going to pursue completely the exact course of betrayal he followed in 1917–18. Green is going to help enlist American workers in this present world slaughter.
 
Lewis Is Smarter
John L. Lewis, president of the CIO, is a trifle smarter in his approach.
Speaking on Labor Day, Lewis declared properly that the American workers want no war or any part of it. This is the sentiment of the huge majority of workers. They have nothing to get from war.
So what does Lewis propose the American workers do to keep out of war? Fight for a popular referendum? No! Fight against repeal of the neutrality bill? No! What program does Lewis have to offer? None!
Instead, Lewis very insidiously prepares the minds of the CIO workers to participate in another world war. “The CIO is the bulwark of democracy. The true defender of democracy!” Remember that one? President Wilson, aided by John L. Lewis, among others, used that in 1917–18 to recruit the American workers in the last phoney war to save the world for democracy.
Mr. Lewis also showed what he has in mind by another speech given that day by James B. Carey, secretary of the national CIO (who obviously spoke with John L.’s approval).
Carey said he didn’t like the present War Resources Board. Did Carey object to the dictatorial powers given it by President Roosevelt? Of course not. Did he point out that the creation of this board was a major step in preparing for American participation in the world war? Hardly! That this board was going to run industry the way it saw fit and the hell with wages, hours and working conditions ? Not one word of serious criticism.
Mr. Carey objects because labor doesn’t have a representative on this union-busting, strike-breaking, dictatorial board. You see, it isn’t fair, according to Mr. Carey, to allow the bosses to break the unions during war-time. They’ve got to be assisted by a labor faker.
Would anyone be surprised if Carey’s candidate for this post of labor representative on the War Resources Board was Mr. Lewis?
 
Sugar-Coating
The American labor leaders have enough contact with their rank and file to know that no one, even the golden-voiced F.D.R., is going to sell them on the idea of giving up their lives in another war in which the whole show is exposed beforehand.
The War Resources Board is a crude set-up at present. Too many J.P. Morgan men on it. Too many known opponents of Organized Labor. Hard to sell that kind of an outfit to workers. Hard to make anyone believe in the baloney of “war for democracy” when such flagrant rule of the bosses is revealed.
What the CIO leaders are trying to do is show Roosevelt and Wall Street the “correct” way to enlist the workers in another slaughter. Give them a post here and there. (What’s one vote among ten, especially when it’s sewed up too for the bosses.) Give the workers the illusion that they are having something to say about how the slaughter is being conducted. Then maybe they’ll fight. Maybe.
 



Here is a choice bit of information that Attorney General (I Break Strikes) Frank Murphy let slip a few days ago in Washington.
“Detective organizations set up by industrial concerns to prevent sabotage would work closely with the Federal Bureau of Investigation” Mr. Murphy explained to a New York Times reporter.
 
Employ Spies
What does it mean? The federal government is enlisting the services of stool-pigeons, company spies, strike-breaking organizations, to fight “sabotage.”
And what is “sabotage” to a Pinkerton? Or a Tom Girdler agent? Or any stool pigeon in a union? Workers have had not a little experience with this in the last few years. “Sabotage” consists of being a good union man, fighting for rights and good conditions within the plant.
The federal government can’t just jail every good union man who feels that, war or no war, workers have a right to fight for just demands. That would be too crude. It would expose the war dictatorship too much.
 
Frameups Ahead
So the government must now prepare the ground work for a frameup. “Sabotage by spies” becomes the theme song of the FBI. Once that is accepted, any worker in the plant who remains a union militant is branded a “saboteur.” He “disrupts” national defense. Company stool pigeons will hurl the charge. The FBI is going to “work closely with them.”
Yet the United Rubber Workers of America’s convention, to mention the latest union convention held, went on record to support the Roosevelt administration in its war moves!
 
Seniority Rights!
Our prediction of last May that the question of seniority rights during war-time would become a greater issue apparently is being borne out by various information coming to the office.
Unions everywhere are beginning to ask for the continuation of seniority rights during war service. That is, if a workers is taken from the plant for army service, his seniority continues as though he remained in the plant.
What is our attitude towards this demand? We can only reiterate what was published then. Now every unionist is in favor of seniority rights under all circumstances. What is disturbing is the calm acceptance of the idea of conscription in wartime.
Workers should never give up an inch of their rights under any conditions, if it is possible. Fight for seniority rights in event of conscription? Sure. The best way to fight against it, however, is to fight against the conscription of labor.
While on this subject, it might be worthwhile to repeat certain other elementary strategy for unionists in this period.
War does not substitute new problems for old ones in the union movement. It adds new ones and intensifies the present problems. The rising price level makes the wage question more acute. The government demands for war production will intensify the struggle over hours of work, conditions of work and the speed-up.
 
What to Do
Every present headache of a shop committeeman increases. Before actual declaration of war, the bosses will give in to serious pressure because the prospect of additional profits is too tempting to permit big shutdowns.
However, the bosses hope to end all the business of making any concessions once war starts by the use of the federal machinery to hogtie labor.
The “impartial” labor boards consisting mainly of professional and business people are supposed to settle all labor disputes, backed by the US Army. What’s new for the labor movement is how to fight these boards. Direct negotiations between unions and employers is the general slogan around which this struggle can be carried.
The aim of progressive unionists is always the same. Get the best possible union conditions under any circumstances.
 



Fisher Body
CLEVELAND, OHIO – An auto worker on the picket line told me the story of the role of Homer Martin, president of the A.F. of L.-U.A.W., in the strike at the Fisher body plant of General Motors.
When the CIO called the strike, and the great majority of tool and die men walked out, Martin rushed into this city with a thunderous roar that “No CIO minority is going to keep the AFL majority out.”
Martin announced a big mass meeting for the AFL. Exactly 20 workers from Fisher plant attended. Stung by this rebuke, Martin left town.
Incidentally, one of his chief assistants in Cleveland is scabbing during this strike, and was in the plant when the pitched battle was on.
Gratifyingly enough, Martin and his Cleveland assistants are hardly less unpopular with the AFL rank and file and even some leaders, than they are with the CIO.
 
Strike Issues
The radio speech of William J. Schwed, member of the executive board of the Fisher local of the CIO-UAW, besides blasting the city administration, did a good job of explaining the real strike issues.
The strike was called, he declared, because General Motors refused to negotiate on demands by skilled workers at Fisher body, for a wage increase of 15 to 25 cents an hour so they would receive the same standard of pay as prevailed in the Detroit plants; for more job security and for a proper apprentice system.
General Motors made $100,000,000 profit for the first half of 1939, or three times as much as the profit for the first six months of 1938.
“Who produced this profit?” Schwed asked. “We General Motors workers. Are we entitled to a share of this huge profit in the form of higher wages? Certainly we are, and no one but the heads of the corporation will say ‘no’.
“The newspapers try to make grown-up Cleveland citizens believe that we go out to create violence on the picket line – that we want to fight the police. What could be more insane?
“Does any worker in his right mind want to fight 450 armed police? Does anyone believe we enjoy getting our heads cracked by the clubs of Mayor Burton’s police?”
“The police provoked violence!” he emphasized, and told how they began slugging pickets. The struggle of the workers was purely a defensive one to protect their rights against police terror.
 
Riot Zone
“We find that Safety Director Eliot Ness has illegally established what is called a riot zone around the plant,” Schwed continued. “He has ordered that the only Clevelanders who dare enjoy American liberties within the now extended empire of General Motors – that is, the streets of Cleveland around the plant – are strikebreakers and scabs.”
While the union maintains a minimum picket line at the plant gates and scattered forces usually stand nearby, the device of picketing the homes of all prominent scabs has been added to put heat on the company.
At a special meeting of the strikers, following the battle, a union official read off the names and home addresses of 27 of the leading scabs, much to the dismay and chagrin of the company and the police, not to mention the rats themselves.
Since the settlement will be negotiated on a nation-wide basis, each local unit of strikers has as the main task keeping the plant shut down. Negotiations are out of the hands of local committees.
 
AFL Feeling
An attempt to obtain support of the Cleveland AFL movement against the brutality of the cops met with official rebuff, although all progressive AFL leaders are in strong sympathy with the strikers.
Antagonism of the AFL building trades leaders is the reason given for the failure of the AFL to aid the CIO. “These CIO guys are out to get us, why the hell should we help them?” an AFL building trades leader snarled.
Actually, smart strategy would dictate that even from a selfish point of view the AFL building trades should go to bat for the CIO. Then they would have a case against the CIO invasion of the building trades later on.
 



Behind the fanfare and dramatic highlights of the present dispute of the actors and stagehands is a deeply-rooted and profound crisis in this section of the AFL, which has finally flared into the open. A review of the developments will explain the significance and scope of the crisis and answer the question so many unionists have asked: What’s it all about?
The AFL has two main organizations in the theatrical and entertainment world. The technical workers are affiliated to the International Alliance of Theatrical Stage Employees, usually referred to as the stage hands union. Motion picture operators, etc., are part of this set-up.
The actors are members of one of the various unions chartered by the Associated Actors and Artists of America, known as the Four A’s. Hollywood stars, for example, are members of the Screen Actors Guild, while the night club performers, vaudeville actors, etc. were in the American Federation of Actors, the union whose internal frictions brought the crisis to a head.
Broadway stars and actors are in the famous Actors Equity Association, affiliated to the Four A’s. Radio stars are in the Federation of Radio artists, also of the Four A’s.
 
Racketeers Seek a Way to Muscle In
The stage hands unions have a long history of organization. About 60,000 skilled workers are members of the various organizations within the I.A.T.S.E. Total strength of the Four A’s unions is around 30,000.
The history of the I.A.T.S.E. unions has many black chapters in it. George E. Browne, international president of the I.A.T.S.E. has as one of his chief aides, William Bieff, a Chicago associate of Al Capone. Another big shot is John P. (Big) Nick, a vice-president, who is under indictment on an extortion charge. He is charged with having chiseled $20,000 from St. Louis employers in return for a guarantee that the stage hands union would not ask for wage increases.
In Hollywood, Bieff is under investigation for an alleged payment of $100,000 by film producers to him in return for guarantees similar to those Nick was supposed to have made.
Within the I.A.T.S.E., Bieff, Nick and similar elements have been urging the union to take over the jurisdiction in the actors union fields, that is, the Four A’s jurisdiction.
To put the matter bluntly, since 1937 these Chicago boys have been seeking a way to muscle in on the rich and lucrative actors union field.
 
Whitehead Rule Stirs Resentment
The fight within the American Federation of Actors in New York City, an affiliate of the Four A’s, gave the Chicago boys their chance, they thought.
Ralph Whitehead, executive secretary of the AFA, has long been under rank and file criticism. The AFA grew quickly in the early NRA days and obtained some contracts. But Whitehead was a ruthless dictator of the union, rank and file participation in obtaining contracts was excluded, and temporary agreements very damaging to the interests of the rank and file were made.
Resentment reached a new high this spring when an agreement was arranged between Whitehead and Billy Rose, of the New York World’s Fair Aquacade. Chorus girls rehearsed for weeks without pay, union leaders were fired, wages were poor. These conditions, combined with reports that Whitehead was using union funds for personal use, brought ugly rumors and Whitehead asked for an investigation in self-defense.
He was found guilty, after a couple of hectic union meetings in which he and Sophie Tucker, the president, sought vainly to win back the rank and file. When Whitehead and Tucker refused to abide by the decisions of the Four A’s, the parent body, the charter of the AFA was yanked, and a new provisional charter was given in this field to the American Guild of Variety Artists, headed by Eddie Cantor.
Whitehead, Tucker and others then made a private deal with Browne, president of the I.A.T.S.E. who gave them a charter without either consulting the stagehands or even his own executive board.
The fact that Joseph Padway, general counsel of the AFL, represented Whitehead during this controversy gave credence to the rumor that the AFL executive council intended to aid the stage hands union invade the actors field.
It was this situation which aroused the Hollywood and Broadway stars, who knew too much about the role of the Chicago boys to submit to the invasion without a desperate struggle.
In a series of brilliant publicity moves which exposed completely the hatched-up plot, Hollywood and Broadway stars went to bat before the executive council on the question. In the matter of jurisdiction, they easily proved by previous decisions of the AFL that the Four A’s and not the stage hands union had jurisdiction in the actors’ field. They threatened to split from the AFL rather than lose their fundamental right of autonomy.
For five hours at the AFL council meeting, Ralph Morgan president of the Screen Actors Guild, Lawrence Tibbet, Frank Gilmore, president of the Four A’s, Kenneth Thompson, executive secretary of the Screen Actors Guild and other prominent Four A’s union leaders blasted away at the crude attempt of the I.A.T.S.E. reactionary leadership to raid the actor’s field.
 
Progressives Win First Skirmish
The C.I.O. is already in the picture, claiming a membership of 5,000 in a stage-hands and technicians union. If the dispute between the Four A’s and the I.A.T.S.E. culminates in a strike, the C.I.O. naturally would assist the Four A’s, and perhaps break the hold of the I.A.T.S.E. in its own field.
What has been accomplished so far?
The AFL executive council was unable to take away the autonomy of the Four A’s. This is clearly a victory for proponents of democracy within the AFL.
The under-paid, badly exploited chorus girls and night club performers have a fighting chance of building the American Guild of Variety Artists into a militant union which will be able to alleviate their terrible conditions, thanks to the solidarity of the Hollywood and Broadway stars.
The Chicago boys have met with another rebuff in their persistent efforts to chisel in the rich actors’ unions.
Of course, the main struggle between the progressive elements and the reactionary elements in this section of the AFL is by no means over with. The first major skirmish, however, was won by the progressive tendencies. That is important because it gives real hope for the final outcome of the struggle.
 



CIO and Stalin
The heaviest blow ever delivered against the Stalinists in the CIO was given this week by Stalin through his agreement with Hitler.
Symbolic of days to come was the public attack Wednesday by Heywood Broun, president ally in the CIO, on the new Stalin line, Broun denounced the Stalin-Hitler pact in his national column!
It is no exaggeration to say that the bottom of the Stalinist strategy in the CIO dropped out this week.
A revulsion against the cynical deal between Stalin and Hitler is bound to sweep the entire labor movement. And a chief stock-in-trade of the Stalinists within the CIO, “anti-Hitlerism”, boomerangs against them, with a terrific thud.
Very significantly, John L. Lewis has maintained a discreet silence about the pact, although William Green, president of the AFL, rushed to print to chuckle over the dilemma of the present C.I.O. line which is Stalinist-influenced.
 
CIO Liability
For it is becoming increasingly clear to everyone that the Stalinists are a terrible liability to Lewis and the CIO from any point of view. Experience teaches that neither they nor their policies can be trusted.
We know of many CIO unions in the East and middle-West where progressive tendencies have been slowly arising. Now they have been given another punch against the Stalinists. It was furnished by Stalin.
The taunts of the progressives in the labor movement will be exceeded only by the unconcealed chagrin of the Stalinist followers. Because there is no answer to the fact that the overwhelming majority of people interpret the pact as, “the Stalinists and fascists are getting together.”
Many big CIO unions are holding conventions soon, including the national CIO. This places the C.P. in an inextricable dilemma. What happens to the carload of Stalinist resolutions that usually swamped progressives?
Where will the resolution on collective security be? The one which Harry Bridges, Joe Curran, Mervin Rathborne, and other C.P.ers defended at the last CIO convention.
 
No More Boycott?
What about the CIO national resolution to boycott German goods? And the one on peace and democracy? What kind of speech can John Brophy, Stalinized director of the CIO, give two weeks from now to the United Rubber Workers of America convention? Last year he talked against Hitlerism. Picture the headaches of the Stalinists in the auto workers unions trying to defend a Hitler-Stalin pact!
In the S.W.O.C. only a few weeks ago, David J. Macdonald, secretary-treasurer, with the approval of Phillip Murray, took a blast at “communism.” Steel Labor, official publication of the S.W.O.C., carried an editorial repudiating all “isms.”
Clearing their skirts of Stalinist association will be a major activity of many CIO leaders in the next period who previously went along. Of course, red-baiting, amalgams, etc. will be far too common and dangerous.
 
And the Militants?
From our point of view, however, the important question is what happens to the hundreds of union militants who joined the Stalinists under the illusion that it was a “progressive party.” Their first reaction inevitably will be, “We’ve been sold out!” All the fine talk by Stalinist organizers that “Our Party is the only real opponent of Hitler,” will mock the militants.
Obviously, if there is a serious dent in the ranks of the Stalinists – and it seems probable – it will come first from these healthy proletarian elements. Already there are reports of how Stalinist members in the CIO wince and duck when razzed by the cry, “Heil Stalin!”
A friend at the teachers union convention now meeting in Buffalo wrote today that the Stalinists were dazed and punch drunk by the news of the pact.
A crack up of Stalinist forces in the labor movement is now on the order of the day!
Incidentally, will the Stalinists be forced to employ a new technique against labor progressives in the future? Once they called them “Trotskyite-fascists,” or simply “Trotskyites.” Will they now snarl and call them “dirty anti-fascists”?
 



CLEVELAND, Ohio – A much needed move to avoid the plague of jurisdictional fights within the AFL here was made last week under the impetus of the teamsters unions.
Powerful AFL building and construction unions joined with the teamsters to set up a special committee to handle threatened jurisdictional disputes.
 
Storm Center
A sore point in the labor movement here is the encroachment of the Operating Engineers union on building trades unions. A showdown was threatened last week because of the stubbornness of Frank Converse, czar of the engineers unions, on the points of dispute. Converse long has been a storm center of jurisdictional raids.
Keystone of the plan to end costly intra-union fights lies in the establishment of this authoritative committee which would function as a high tribunal with decision-making power.
The jurisdictional committee, it was announced following a conference of influential labor leaders, consists of Ed Murphy, president of the teamsters district council, William Finnegan, president of the Cleveland Federation of Labor, Thomas Lenahan, secretary of the federation, and Albert Dalton, business agent of the building trades.
 
Procedure Established
Procedure to be followed is first for the unions involved to send representatives to a special conference to iron out the problem.
If a deadlock is reached, appeal must be made to the committee of four which would hold hearings and suggest a solution. If the unions still disagreed, the committee would have the power to render a final and binding decision.
In event the committee of four was divided evenly on a question, it would unanimously select a fifth labor leader to participate and cast the deciding vote.
Cleveland labor leaders said they expect formation of similar committees on a nationwide scale as part of the solution to the jurisdictional problems in the AFL.
 
Answers CIO
It frankly is a counter-move to the CIO threat of organizing in the building trades fields in opposition to the AFL.
In the current dispute in Cleveland, the six unions which already have accepted the plan are the firemen and oilers, excavating drivers, structural iron workers, stone cutters, cement finishers and operating engineers.
Because the plan was sponsored by the most powerful leaders in the labor movement here there is considerable hope that other unions will go along with the plan. Among those not yet in the agreement are the carpenters, bricklayers and lathers unions.
The plan was made at an emergency conference called under the auspices of the teamsters last week.
It was a counter-move to Converse’s open threat to fight other craft unions which refused to allow encroachments by the operating engineers. Converse retreated from his position after the conference was held and he announced he would subscribe to the net setup.
 



AKRON, Ohio – The 55th annual convention of the Ohio Federation of Labor, just concluded, reflected the changing trends in the A.F.L. movement in this country.
Of major importance was the fact that the teamsters union assumed domination of the Ohio A.F.L. in Cleveland, Toledo, Cincinnati, Akron, Canton and Youngstown, the truck drivers union already had replaced the building trades unions as controlling factor in the central labor unions. This was extended to the Ohio Federation of Labor.
All this was shown definitely by the elections. The slate drawn up by the teamsters and backed by the meat-cutters and miscellaneous unions won without much effort.
Only by the grace of the teamsters were John E. Breidenbach, Dayton Republican labor boss, and Albert Dalton, Cleveland Republican “man within the labor movement” re-elected to the state executive board. Both were very unpopular, but their connections with the Governor Bricker Republican machine, the cause of their unpopularity, saved them. The teamsters felt they wanted an “inside” to the present state administration.
 
Green’s Role
Resolutions demanding unity with the C.I.O. which went so far as to openly criticize the A.F.L. top leadership were introduced to the resolutions committee and backed by a large section of the delegates, including most of the teamsters.
Fearing that the convention would get out of line on this problem. Mike Lyden, president of the Ohio Federation of Labor, sent for William Green, A.F.L. president.
Green gave one of his typical demagogic speeches with emphasis on the “no compromise” attitude towards the C.I.O. And he brought along a renegade from the C.I.O., Homer Martin, to help him. Martin followed up Green’s speech with a red-baiting talk in which, among other things, he washed a lot of dirty linen of the C.I.O.
Despite this barrage, the convention adopted a resolution urging unity with the C.I.O., although some of the teeth were taken out of the original resolutions.
If this represents the convention attitude, predominantly composed of A.F.L. officials, one can well imagine what the sentiments of the rank and file of the A.F.L. Are.
 
Beal Case
Very seldom does an A.F.L. convention reject the unanimous recommendation of a key committee, such as the resolutions committee. A highlight of this convention was the reversal of the resolutions committee on the Fred Beal case.
After a brilliant short speech by Sam Pollock of Akron, state secretary-treasurer of the butchers union, the convention voted to demand freedom for Beal, although the resolutions committee was against it.
So effective was the talk of the Akron labor leader that a prominent member of the resolutions committee was overheard later congratulating Pollock on the victory.
Incidentally, Mike Lyden, the state president, tried to assist the resolutions committee by refusing to call the vote against the resolutions committee recommendation. This flagrant trick was quickly called to order by the delegates, and on a standing vote freedom for Beal was demanded.
Is it necessary to add that a handful of Stalinist delegates voted against the Beal freedom resolution?
 
Workers’ Control
The convention almost passed a resolution which called for labor to prepare itself for control of all production. It was introduced by a Cleveland delegate who said he’d been thinking things over and felt that a real crisis was coming and labor would have to take power.
Thomas Donelly, state federation secretary-treasurer, rushed to the microphone when he saw that no opposition was being voiced to the resolution.
He picked up the key clauses in the resolution and pointed out that it called for a revolution and workers control of production. “It’s pure communism,” he exclaimed. This chagrined the convention and the delegates who signed the resolution.
They were amazed at the political implications of the resolution. The delegate who had written up the resolution votes Democrat, and is one. He was puzzled by the situation and resented being called a revolutionary, what we thought was important was this trend of thought unconsciously creeping into the labor movement, even the A.F.L. section of it.
 



Recently the New York Post carried a long story on the Hotel, Restaurant, Bartenders and Soda Dispensers Unions welding into one centralized group to organize the culinary and hotel services.
The step was hailed as a giant step forward towards industrial unionism of the A.F.L. unions involved. Announcement of the plans came from a reorganization meeting of the New York local joint executive board of the Hotel and Restaurant Employees International union and the Bartenders International union, AFL affiliates.
The story spoke of the thirteen unions pooling their resources, establishing a $50,000 organizing fund, etc.
 
Too Good to Be True
Since it all sounded too good to be true, we asked a progressive food worker to write us his opinions on the matter. Excerpts from his letter follow:
“The information contained in the Post story is somewhat garbled and there is some misstatement of fact. Firstly, the Locals are not ‘pooling’ their resources. Instead, the Stalinist controlled Local Joint Board (similar to the district council of the Painters union but lacking to a great extent its authority at present) has assessed all Local Unions two cents per capita for the purpose of instituting a full-time appointed secretary of the L.J.B. and several departments.
“The depression has hit the C.P. despite Roosevelt and they need some sinecures for their ‘ex-leaders.’
“However, the main reason for this ‘new centralization of authority’ is the desire of the C.P. to wrest autonomy from the progressively inclined Locals, namely Locals 16 and 677 – although according to the constitution they can only affect the former, which is a waiters union and shares jurisdiction with another Local in shops signed by them.
“Significantly enough the Stalinists in proposing the setup, use the argument that the Brass Rail strike would never have occurred if the L.J.B. had had the power it now pretends to have. (The strike seems lost.) Strike situations invariably embarrass the Stalinist administration for political reasons, and the fact that they reveal stark empty treasuries.”
 
Trend Against C.P.
“The reorganization is in no respect a step towards ‘industrial unionism’ as the story states. The Stalinists made a feint towards such organization two years ago – amalgamation of some craft locals. If it is attempted by them now, it will not be done voluntarily because it would weaken their position considerably (apparently all they are seeking is a cloak for maneuvers to usurp further control).
“The trend in all the food locals is against them and they face the possibility of being slaughtered at the polls in the coming elections – as they were in Local 677, and to a lesser extent in Local 16 a few months ago – unless they pull something spectacular or diabolical out of their bag of tricks.”
 
Negro Unionists
Worthy of study for progressive unionists is the material contained in the current Journal of Negro Education, published by Howard University and available at all the libraries, on the question of Negroes in the union movement.
This material is part of a general survey of the status of the Negro in American society (also very valuable insofar as information, etc. is concerned).
A special section is devoted to the presentation of the statistics of the number of Negroes in industry, types of work they do, etc.
Then a brief history of the Negro’s role in the American labor movement in the past, his efforts to build independent unions, the policy and practices of the A.F.L. in relation to this problem, and the C.I.O. policy and practice towards the Negro is contained in this magazine.
Along with Spero and Harris’ book, The Black Worker, this material is the best we have been able to find for facts on this vital problem. Unfortunately, the material is too copious to be presented in this column. We can only recommend a. reading of it.
 



NEW YORK CITY – A real indication of how the members of the International Typographical Union stand on the question of labor unity was furnished this week-end by “Big Six” as Local 6 of the I.T.U., the largest unit in the union, is known.
A special resolution was adopted at a membership meeting urging the I.T.U. to defy the AFL executive council on the issue of assessments levied for a war against the CIO.
Only last week William Green, president of the AFL, announced the suspension of the I.T.U. for its refusal to contribute an assessment to the AFL “war chest.”
 
Issues Involved
For two years the I.T.U. has persistently refused to collect this tax of one cent per member, which would amount to $22,000, and turn it over to the AFL executive council.
At the last convention of the AFL the seating of the I.T.U. delegates was a hot issue because of its stand on this question but a compromise was worked out which simply postponed action on the question.
The AFL council precipitated a crisis on this problem last week because the I.T.U. is holding its national convention at Fort Worth, Texas, now and the council hopes that the policy of the I.T.U. can be changed.
The purpose of the Big Six resolution is to crystallize national sentiment within the I.T.U. for a “Don’t fight the CIO” attitude.
There is another and just as fundamental issue involved in the dispute between the I.T.U. and the AFL executive committee. The right of autonomy.
Elmer Brown, newly-elected president of the Big Six, pointed it out in a prepared speech given before the union voted on the resolution.
The AFL does not have the right to levy an assessment on the printers because the union is an autonomous affiliate of the AFL, according to the view of the I.T.U.
“The AFL has been exercising authority never intended by the membership of the AFL. I could never agree to submit to the policies advocated by the AFL.
“Nor would I ever recommend that my union submit to the dictation of the executive council of the AFL. To do so would destroy the autonomy of the International Typographical Union.”
“It is my opinion that this suspension was timed for one purpose only: that the reactionaries within the executive council of the AFL had hoped that by suspending the I.T.U. on the eve of its convention they would intimidate us. They can suspend us, they can fight us, but they can not intimidate us,” Brown declared.
 
Danger of Split
If the I.T.U. nationally follows its present line and refuses to pay the assessment, many new complications will develop in the AFL internally. Automatic suspension from Central Trades and Labor Assemblies might follow. And the relationship of the I.T.U. to other unions in the Allied Printing Trades Councils becomes a new headache. For which the main responsibility will rest on the AFL executive council because of its intransigent attitude toward the autonomy of the I.T.U.
Naturally, the stand of the AFL executive council tends to throw the I.T.U. into the arms of the CIO, especially if all the complications develop.
Meanwhile, progressives within the AFL have a job on their hands to prevent a split in local bodies because of the suspension of the I.T.U.
 



When our movement adopted the idea of a sliding scale of wages for union contracts last year to protect the living standards of the workers from wartime price boom conditions, many unionists considered it too theoretical and not practical enough.
Like many other advanced ideas, it took the hard impact of events to drive home the merits of this proposal. Yet, it was essentially a simple idea. Prices rise before and during war. Unless union contracts are signed that permit upward adjustment in wage scales in that period, the workers really take a wage cut because costs of living have increased but the amount of money the worker has with which to buy goods stood still. So part of our transitional program consisted of urging the workers to get a provision in union contracts which guaranteed a rise in wages to correspond with a rise in prices.
 
Prices Rise
The second world war already has brought a rapid rise in prices in America, and there seems to be no stopping. Right after Hitler marched into Poland, a sharp upward trend in the price of food became evident throughout the country. Prices increased from ten to twenty per cent on foods, etc.
The pinch was felt quickly by workers. They were making the same pay, working just as hard,and yet they could buy less. The rising price level was reducing their real wages. A nationwide cry against “war profiteering” was raised by the labor movement as part of the protest against this injustice.
 
Some Unions Act
More or less progressive unions, whose leadership had foresight enough to have clauses contained in the signed contracts which permit reopening of the wage questions, are using these clauses to begin negotiating along the idea of a sliding scale of wages.
Sidney Hillman, president of the Amalgamated Clothing Workers Union, announced in behalf of 225,000 members that they would seek a wage increase of ten per cent soon to cover the men because of the rising price level.
The Textile Workers of America has also taken steps in this direction.
David Dubinsky, president of the International Ladies Garment Workers Union, has advised all local unions to include provisions for cost-of-living increases in all new contracts. He proposed that wages be raised automatically when the price index figured out by the US Department of Labor goes up five points. Incidentally, the Textile Workers proposals are along these lines.
And there have been similar steps in other unions. Reports of the inclusion of the sliding scale of wages proposal in union contracts are beginning to appear in the labor press. It is entirely possible that the CIO convention will take decisive action on this question.
 
AFL War Stand
The AFL convention is facing an unusual resolution on the war question which was submitted to it by the executive council.
Besides the ordinary provisions about “we stand for neutrality, democracy, keep America safe and out of European wars” (which are a poor substitute for adopting a Let the People Vote on War slogan), the convention is being asked to call on the United States government to mediate in the second world war!
This section was introduced by William Green, president of the AFL. Who inspired him to introduce it? Since we know through Green’s long history as a labor faker that he, is an agent of American capitalism, we are inclined to doubt the theory that this was introduced as part of the “Hitler peace offensive.”
Did Roosevelt ask his good friend Bill to bring this matter before the AFL convention? And if so, why? Does Roosevelt want to be “forced” to try a mediation of the war which would not “succeed.” Which would mean America would have to go to war to “make peace possible?” The next few days will tell.
 



Pressure on John L. Lewis to purge the Stalinists came directly from President Roosevelt through Sidney Hillman, president of the Amalgamated Clothing Workers of America.
Hillman was so determined to hold a purge at the convention itself that it created a conflict between himself and Lewis before the convention began.
We have been informed that Hillman was so anxious to begin a “red-baiting” drive that he threatened to take the issue on the floor directly.
 
Forces Hillman’s Hand
Besides, Hillman was quite outspoken in his demand that Lewis make peace with Roosevelt, and the CIO convention go on record in full support of Roosevelt.
Lewis became disgusted with his ally, Hillman, and decided to force his hand in advance of the convention. Lewis calmly told the CIO executive council and leading figures at a joint meeting that he was going to resign the chairmanship.
This announcement created consternation among those present at that meeting for it appeared that Lewis was in dead earnest about resigning.
Hillman jumped up and strongly urged Lewis to reconsider his decision. He said he’d rather have Lewis as president even if he thought Lewis was wrong on some policies, especially with respect to Roosevelt, than to have correct policies adopted, and Lewis resign.
It was Hillman’s way of saying that he was willing to retreat from a drastic onslaught on the Stalinists at the convention.
Lewis also retreated from his refusal to support the Roosevelt neutrality bill and whatever hesitation he had on purging the Stalinists was removed.
However, he was much smarter in his strategy than Hillman. Hillman wanted a dramatic purge at the convention combined with a stirring rally to line up the CIO openly behind Roosevelt’s pro-war policies.
Lewis bided his time until the convention was over. Then he walked into the executive board meeting and said bluntly what everyone knew he had on his mind.
 
Strong Language
The decision of the convention to have an eight man directing board consisting of the officers and six new vice-presidents, was a strong hint to the Stalinists that they were going to be left out in the cold insofar as top leadership was concerned.
But the tough talk of Lewis to the board members was stronger than the Stalinists had expected.
“Every known Communist Party member on the payroll as organizer or other appointed position is to be fired.”
“If there is any doubt about an individual, give him the benefit providing he devotes his full time to building the CIO.
“We’re not going to have a red-baiting campaign but we are going to get rid of these people.”
These are literally the exact words he used in his talk.
While the CIO top leaders are calculating that the Stalinists will accept this and keep quiet, Harry Bridges, California director of the CIO appeared at the woodworkers convention to help defeat a resolution condemning Nazism, communism, etc.
This furnishes the first real test on the question of the Stalinists in the CIO.
What action will Lewis take after convention delegates pro-test about the “interference” of Bridges who was not an official delegate but only a guest at the woodworkers’ convention? Judging by press reports, the delegates are determined to launch a drive against the Bridges action.
Stormy weather lies ahead in the CIO movement.
 



Once before the legions of the Red Army marched behind the hammer and sickle into the poverty-stricken fields of Poland towards Warsaw, and the whole world trembled under the impact of the event.
A brilliant young officer was given command of the troops on the “western front” in the offensive against the Polish Army. He was Mikhail Tukhachevsky, burning with zeal and ambition to extend the socialist revolution throughout Europe.
Opposite the Red Army stood Joseph Pilsudski, harsh dictator, backed by France and England, who dreamed of carving out a vast empire, Greater Poland, from the Ukraine, all East Prussia, Lithuania, White Russia, and Latvia. Repeatedly, Pilsudski had rejected peace terms offered by the Soviet government in 1919 and early 1920. Pilsudski was determined to strike while the Soviet republic was weak. His troops marched towards the Soviet frontier on April 25, 1920.
 
Contrast Tells Story of Russia’s Change
The Red Army was fighting a “defensive war!” No sooner did Pilsudski open hostilities than the Revolutionary Council of War ordered troops from everywhere to the Polish frontier. On May 20, Tukhachevsky attacked Smolensk to relieve the pressure on Soviet forces on the south-western front where the Polish army was making advances rapidly. Budenny’s cavalry smashed through enemy lines towards Kiev, it was captured on June 12, and the stage was set for the famous march to Warsaw, although the situation on the south-western front was by no means assured.
The contrast between the 1920 march to Warsaw and Stalin’s invasion of Poland this fall tells the tragic story of the decline of the Soviet Union under the iron heel of Stalin; the degeneration of the Red Army through the cancerous growth of Stalinism; the bewilderment of the world proletariat today.
“Could Europe back up this Socialist movement, which the march on Warsaw constituted, with a revolution in the West?” This was the question posed by Tukhachevsky, planning the strategy of the Red Army for its coming victories. Trotsky alone of the Central Committee of the Bolshevik Party had grave doubts. His knowledge of Poland and its long tortuous history of domination from the outside convinced him that the political consciousness of the Polish masses was not yet developed to a sufficiently high degree to participate in a “revolution from without!”
 
Saw Masses Rallying to the Revolution
The ardor of Tukhachevsky, however, saw no bounds. “Events say ‘Yes’,” he replied to his own question.
“The German workers manifested open opposition to the Entente. They sent back railway-wagons filled with arms and food which France had sent to Poland’s aid; they refused to unload the British and French ships sent to Danzig with arms and munitions; they caused accidents on railways, etc.”
“From East Prussia came hundreds and thousands of volunteers, who formed a German rifle brigade under the banner of the Red Army. In England, the working classes were also in the grip of a very active revolutionary movement.”
The spectre of world revolution haunted Europe! Field Marshal von Blomberg expressed the views of the German General Staff when he wrote a preface to the German edition of Pilsudski’s memoirs.
“The Russo-Polish war is not merely a matter of interest of soldiers. Its result has a universal historical significance. Its importance for Germany can hardly be overestimated, for in this war something more than Polish national liberty,and the continued existence of the Polish Republic was at stake. In its final aspect it was a question whether the Bolshevik Revolution should penetrate further into Europe and thus impose its rule on Germany as well as other countries. In the Germany of 1920 many of the preliminary conditions essential for such a revolution existed.”
 
Advances to the Very Gates of Warsaw
Tukhachevsky began his offensive with 80,000 soldiers and a reserve of 68,000 for whom there was inadequate equipment. The Red Armies on the southwestern front were directed by Yegorov, with Stalin as the representative of the Revolutionary Council of War. Tukhachevsky’s plea for a united command had been turned down by the Council because of the antagonism existing between the two commands. Voroshilov, incidentally, was commissar of Budenny’s cavalry, which was part of the southwestern forces.
The Red Army hurled forward with invincible force under the leadership of Tukhachevsky. Vilna fell on July 14. Grodno on the 19th. Brest-Litovsk was taken on August 1st. Pilsudski gave a graphic description of the advance of the Red Army in his memoirs.
“One day they were only about 20 kilometres away from Warsaw and its environs, i.e., only a normal day’s march. This unceasing, worm like advance of a huge enemy horde, which went on for weeks, with spasmodic interruptions here and there, gave us the impression of something irresistible rolling up like some terrible thunderclouds that brooked no opposition.”
Perhaps the Red Army would make the “revolution from without?” Perhaps the German Spartacists and the Russian Bolsheviks would join hands in a Soviet Poland, and the banner of world revolution spread like wild fire over the plains and cities of Europe. Revolutionists throughout the world thrilled at news of every advance of the Red Army. Restless workers impatiently awaited the signal for the greater class struggles ahead. The Red Army of Lenin and Trotsky was on the march!
 
Allies Rush to Pilsudski’s Defense
Alarmed at the Red Army advances, the Allies rushed French artillery in decisive quantities, with French officers to the aid of Warsaw. Meanwhile, Pilsudski had planned a counter-stroke to stem the tide. He deliberately withdrew vital divisions from the southwestern front and concentrated his main forces against Tukhachevsky. This was partly foreseen by the Red commander and was guarded against by a plan for the Red Armies in the southwest to strike on Lublin and prevent the Polish offensive.
Tukhachevsky finally had obtained an agreement from the Revolutionary Council of War to subordinate the armies in the southwest to his command. His orders were intended to bring a concentration of the Red troops against Pilsudski’s massed might. Yegorov, prompted by Stalin, refused to obey orders and Budenny’s cavalry with Voroshilov’s approval kept going towards Lwow, instead of northward. Exactly what Pilsudski had hoped would happen. Day after day of critical fighting in the western front brought no action from Stalin or his cohorts.
 
Blunders Are Costly and Fatal
Burning with ambition for a military victory to offset Tukhachevsky’s successes, the commanders on the southwestern front instead marched towards Lwow. For five days the cavalry of Budenny hurled itself against the strongly entrenched Polish infantry at Lwow while Pilsudski was making headway in his offensive against Tukhachevsky. When it was too late and his forces were weakened, Budenny and Voroshilov turned towards Lublin.
Tukhachevsky was forced to order a retreat, under the blows of Pilsudski’s concentrated forces and the treachery of the Stalin-Yegorov-Voroshilov bloc,and the Red Army fell back to a point which marked the boundary between Poland and Soviet Russia until a few weeks ago.
For years Stalin and his cohorts did not even make an attempt to defend themselves from the open charges that Tukhachevsky hurled at them. Only when Russian history was being rewritten to suit the needs of the Stalin bureaucracy was a defense attempted. Of course Trotsky was made the scapegoat. He had participated in drawing up the campaign with Tukhachevsky, and the whole conception was “erroneous”, declared the creator of the Moscow frame-ups!
 
Stalin Adds a New Chapter to His Crimes
Eric Wollenberg, in his book, The Red Army, summarized the Polish campaign as follows.
“The march on Warsaw was unable to bring about a revolution in Central Europe because of the fact that centuries of oppression at the hands of the Great Russians had left the Polish proletariat not yet sufficiently mature for revolution, coincided with the military blunders associated with the name of Stalin, Voroshilov and Yegorov.”
Viewed in historical perspective, one can well understand how infinitely more difficult has become the task of the Polish and world proletariat to make the revolution when the same Stalin orders the Red Army to march again into Poland, not to spread the doctrine of world revolution, but to assure domination for the counter-revolutionary Stalinist bureaucracy. Stalin must add to his long list of crimes, including his first treachery in Poland, the present invasion of Poland.
 



John L. Lewis waited until the last days of the CIO convention and the meeting of the executive council afterwards to make a cautious move against the Stalinist machine within the organization.
First dispute between the CIO leaders and their Stalinist allies threatened to arise over the election of a vice president. Emil Rieve, backed by Sidney Hillman, was put up to oppose Joe Curran, Stalinist candidate. Rieve is from the textile workers union. Curran is the boss of the National Maritime Union.
 
Clipping the C.P.
At the last minute the Stalinists retreated and Curran withdrew his name. So the Stalinists found themselves without a man among the six vice presidents elected by the convention.
However, the real defeat for them came when the CIO executive council announced that Harry Bridges was only California director of the CIO, instead of West Coast director. A couple of Lewis men were given the northwest territory.
John Brophy, pious fellow-traveler of the C.P. who was national director of the CIO, was also clipped. He was replaced by Allan Haywood, New York CIO director.
While Haywood has played ball with the Stalinists in New York, he is a one hundred percent Lewis man. Since we worked together for a year in the United Rubber Workers Union, I could not accept the arguments of some progressives who insisted Haywood was a Stalinist.
Incidentally, Haywood is a capable organizer and negotiator, whose abilities will mean considerable improvement in the activities of the CIO from Washington.
Adolph Germer is being transferred from the Michigan CIO directorship to a post in Washington.
 
Tightening Hold
In essence, the meaning of these moves is that Lewis is tightening his hold organizationally on the CIO by putting “reliable” Mine Workers Union officials in all key CIO posts.
Besides, Lewis gave an interview to the West Coast press in which he made his first public pronouncement on the question of “communists in the CIO.”
“If there are any budding young communists who think they can make a life work of taking over the CIO for the Communist Party they had better forget it,” Lewis is quoted as saying.
“The Communist Party sent in witnesses to the Dies Committee to brag about their domination of the CIO and build up the Party,” he added.
“There will be no witch hunts or red hunts and any union has the right to elect or select anyone it chooses to lead it, however I will insist that CIO leaders give their entire allegiance to the organization,” Lewis declared.
This is the first direct attack on the Stalinists in the CIO that Lewis has made. It takes considerable significance, therefore.
 
Purge in Offing
Naturally the question arises: Will there be a purge of the Stalinists in the CIO, and on what basis?
A preliminary examination of the moves indicates that a purge in one form or another is in the offing. However, Lewis reveals his caution by the statement that there will be no witch hunt. The Stalinists, after all, are strongly entrenched in some CIO unions, and besides, Lewis hates to admit that he was wrong all this time in having an alliance with them.
The attitude of the Stalinists on the Lewis moves has not yet been made public since the Daily Worker simply refuses to print any news of the situation to date. Naturally, they are bitter and strongly opposed but the question is: can they afford to make a public attack on the new Lewis position?
The next week or so will give a clearer answer to the questions posed by the Lewis statement and his organizational maneuvers.
 



Alarmed by the remarkable progress of the powerful teamsters unions despite stiff opposition of the employers, the federal government has begun a nationwide drive against the truck drivers in the hope of curbing them.
Not satisfied with trying to persecute the Minneapolis labor movement and its spearhead, the teamsters union, the Department of Justice this week obtained indictments against the teamsters union in Washington, D.C. and St. Louis.
Indications were that this procedure would be followed in other key cities as special grand juries were convened in Cleveland, New York and elsewhere.
 
Move Against AFL
Ostensibly, the Department of Justice campaign is part of a “trust-busting” campaign in the building industry. Actually, it is a crudely concealed maneuver to smash the AFL unions in this field.
The frame-up of the Minneapolis strikers was the first major move in this carefully laid plan of the G-men.
The brazen impudence of the strike-breaking G-men in Minneapolis, their vicious arrests in the vain hope of intimidating the workers, and the whole slew of phoney charges against the strikers is a hint of how they will proceed on a national scale.
Attorney General Frank Murphy, self-styled “friend of labor” had all his high-powered talent find legal loopholes so that the G-men could give an excuse to muscle into the unions.
The Sherman anti-trust law,which was supposed to be against big monopolies and their restraints of trade, was given as the legal basis for the government persecution of the unions.
Local 639 of the IBT in Washington and five union officials were indicted under the Sherman Act on charges of obstructing and delaying work on government and private buildings by strikes, boycotts and violence.
 
Object Is Clear
The intent of the federal government is clear. The G-men hope to establish through the present indictments that strikes, boycotts, and “violence” (instituted by strike-breakers but blamed on unionists) constitute a violation of the Sherman anti-trust law.
This would provide a legal basis then for curbing all militant action of the teamsters and other unions. It would paralyze the union movement, and make possible chiseling, breaking of contracts, reduction of wages, and a return to the open shop in the trucking industry.
However, a powerful union movement of 400,000 organized truck drivers surging forward with gain after gain is hardly going to take this lying down.
The AFL building trades unions are also going to be subject to a heavy battery of government persecution. It will not be the purpose of the G-men to clean up any bad situation in the building trades unions but rather to use any mistakes made by union officials to crack down on the whole labor movement.
Behind the present moves of the federal government to harass and intimidate the union movement if possible, is Roosevelt’s desire to whip labor into line with his pro-war policies.
In the campaign to hogtie the labor movement into the military machine, every possible stick has to be picked up and thrown at the unions. The present G-man drive against the AFL unions is a major part of this campaign, and Roosevelt is handling the “Big Stick.”
 



Until recently, British labor leaders were recognized universally as peers in the fine art of selling out the interests of the workers under the guise of obtaining a victory. Cooperating with the “enlightened” British ruling class, the labor fakers did quite splendidly. Rewards of knighthood and baronage testify to that fact.
However, we are willing to risk the charge of chauvinism and state plainly that in this art the American labor bureaucracy, assisted by the clever Mr. Roosevelt, is now surpassing its British prototype.
In England, the labor fakers and their masters slipped up badly in chaining the union movement to the war machine. His Majesty’s Minister of Supply, Leslie Burgin, advised poorly by dull labor leaders, forgot to consult officially with the trade union movement on war production.
 
Roosevelt Strategy
Meeting only with big business representatives, the Minister of Supply ignored certain inevitable problems which arise in war production; maladjustments, unemployment in some industries, speed-up, working hours, etc. The result was widespread dissatisfaction among union men, and this week the General Council of the Trades Union Congress is conferring to handle the problem. Labor representation will be demanded and probably granted. But the seeds of dissent have been sown.
In America, some naive people have been quite concerned that President Roosevelt would make the similar “mistake.” Mr. Roosevelt recently appointed a War Resources Board,which was ballyhooed as the controlling body of American industry for war.
Liberals were shocked by the composition of this Board. Four men from the House of Morgan, including Edward Stettinius, president of U.S. Steel, were selected. And no representative of the labor movement was among the committee of seven.
Both the CIO and the AFL top leaders worked up a righteous indignation over this omission. John L. Lewis, thundered forth in his Olympian fashion. William Green preached his usual sermon on democracy and labor’s rights.
Friendly correspondents, sympathetic columnists, and “left-wing” New Dealers kept a steady barrage of criticism against the personnel of the War Resources Board.
 
Victory or Fake?
This week Roosevelt announced that the Board would make a report and then go out of existence in a few weeks. WAR INDUSTRIES BOARD TO GO! UNDER FIRE AS REACTIONARY! said the head-lines.
What a “victory” for labor and the true democrats! This will be the theme of every speech for the next few weeks in the camp of Roosevelt supporters. Labor probably will get a representative on a new board. Maybe two, one from the CIO and one from the AFL.
No British muddling through in the Roosevelt strategy. It’s as slick as a whistle. For Roosevelt kills two birds with one stone. General Hugh Johnson, who had a little experience in these matters during the world war, let the cat out of the bag before Roosevelt finished his magic act.
 
Road to War
The selection of the Morgan men was a deliberate move, calculated to arouse antagonism against the present War Industries Board. Taint it with Morgan-British world war infamy! Keep labor off. Give the liberals and labor fakers a phoney issue to howl about.“This isn’t democracy. Labor isn’t represented.”
The pillow fight rages. Then Roosevelt calmly announces the dismissal of the Board. He retreats before “progressive” pressure. A new board is chosen. Labor is represented! Lewis and Green claim a big “victory.” Liberals cry that this proves America is really fighting a war for democracy.
And labor’s rights are strangled by this “victory.” For this very victory spells the road to war, with Lewis and Green showing the way.
 



An inspiration for the American union movement is the struggle that the progressives in the Australian labor movement recently put up against national registration of manpower as a prelude to conscription.
“At the beginning of this year the Australian federal government began active preparations for taking a national register of manpower for war purposes, compulsory, but otherwise similar to that recently taken in Great Britain, which was a forerunner to conscription in that country.
“The National Register Act was one of the four measures passed during the last session of the federal parliament for the purposes of codifying the steps necessary to enable Australia to be used as an arsenal and reservoir for manpower for British imperialism in the southern Pacific.
 
Boycott Slogan
“Progressive unionists immediately coined the slogan, Boycott the National Register! The whole tradition and experience of the union movement pointed to such a slogan as being most suitable. Back in 1916 a similar register, called the War Census Act, was boycotted by 200,000 despite heavy penalties. There was also a similar experience fairly recently with the National Insurance swindle, which was boycotted by hundreds of thousands, and consequently had to be shelved by the federal government.
“The slogan of boycott was taken up very widely, and it became clear that if the campaign remained solid, over 1,000,000 would refuse to register. However, the cowardly labor and trade union reformist leaders became terrified at the response of the rank and file.
“Forgan Smith, labor premier of Queensland, said that mass law breaking would lead to fascism! Under the pressure of the bureaucrats the Australian Council of Trades Unions finally lifted the boycott which they had voted to support.
“But the powerful Melbourne Labor Council refused to accept their advice. The rank and file,of course, was thrown into confusion by the shifting position of the union leaders of the Council of Trades Unions.
Stalinist Stand
“The Stalinists then came out with a statement that in order to avoid ‘isolation’ and to preserve ‘unity’ (i. e. unity with the reformist fakers) there must be no ‘individual opposition’ to the boycott.
“The labor militants, however, stood firmly. Besides issuing thousands of leaflets advocating a continuance of the boycott, they publicly burnt a heap of forms in the Domain. (Burning forms to show hostility is a traditional form of protest in Australia, dating back to the Eureka Stockade struggle, in 1854.)
“For the first time the rank and file of the Communist Party seemed to be at variance with the leadership.
“While even labor leaders have admitted that the boycott was supported by between 75,000 to 100,000, we consider the figure to be nearer 200,000.”
This information comes from a very reliable correspondent from Sydney, Australia, in a letter dated in August.
“Labor militants have pledged themselves to fight this issue to the end. While there is any considerable body among the working class prepared to take a militant stand against war, despite the threat of three months in gaol and a fifty pound fine, the progressives feel they must stand at the head of them,” our correspondent adds.
 



Revealing the heavy pressure of the rank and file, John L. Lewis opened the second annual convention of the CIO with a wordy opposition to war and its preparations, and an appeal that the Roosevelt administration concentrate its major energies on the burning problems of unemployment, insecurity, and the growing cost of living in America.
Reflecting the differences of opinion on the CIO executive board, Lewis dealt with the problem of war without offering any concrete program of fighting against war. Further, he skirted the issue of supporting Roosevelt to avoid a sharp dispute on the convention floor, if possible.
 
Year’s Changes
For the CIO is in an entirely different position than it was at its first convention a year ago. Unqualified endorsement of Roosevelt, promise of support for a “war for democracy,” and unity with the AFL were the main themes of the previous convention, along with the usual planning of organizing campaigns.
In the executive board sessions before the CIO convention, Sidney Hillman, president of the Amalgamated Clothing Workers of America, fought for the reiteration of last year’s program.
Through a public statement issued prior to the CIO convention Hillman gave his unqualified endorsement of Roosevelt’s pro-war policies and his domestic program.
 
Stalinist Role
The seventeen Stalinists on the CIO board favored the “new line” by including the slogan Keep America Out of Imperialist War, by dodging the “neutrality” issue, and by making reservations on support of Roosevelt. Fearing a purge because of the strong feeling in CIO ranks against the Stalin-Hitler pact as well as their“rule or ruin” policy, the Stalinists were cautious in advancing their program.
The Lewis program, backed by his powerful henchmen from the United Mine Workers of America who occupy key position in the CIO consisted mainly of what he had said in his Labor Day speech. That speech created quite a stir because it was regarded as an answer to Roosevelt’s plea for national unity
 .
Third Term Disputed
The break between Roosevelt and Lewis following Roosevelt’s attempted double-cross of the miners’ nation-wide strike last spring, and Roosevelt’s demand for unity with the AFL on any basis forced Lewis to reserve his decision on the 1940 presidential elections. Instead of a third term endorsement for Roosevelt, Lewis favors an indefinite stand for a “progressive” candidate.
Yet the CIO state convention of California which just concluded its sessions went on record for the third term despite top CIO pressure. This issue is likely to evoke a sharp dispute at the national convention.
The Stalinists have apparently obtained the assurance of Lewis that he will seek to suppress any discussion of their role by means of an appeal for “unity.” However, at least one state convention of the CIO has gone on record denouncing the Stalin-Hitler pact, etc., and dodging the issue will be very difficult.
 
Compromises Seen
The Lewis report avoided a serious discussion of the problem of labor unity, although he took his usual cracks at the AFL leadership. This reflects the less favorable position of the CIO on this question since the last convention.
The AFL convention indicated that its membership was well over 4,000,000 while the CIO has discreetly kept silent on its present enrollment. The blundering leadership of Lewis,and above all, the devastating effects of the Stalinist rule-or-ruin clique within the CIO has played havoc with the membership of the industrial unions,although some gains in packing houses and elsewhere can be noted.
Seeking to put up a good front for the CIO, Lewis and the top leadership of the organization have been working day and night to effect compromises on all questions so that the convention will appear “democratic, united and progressive.” Since the essence of Lewis’ control in the CIO is dictatorial,the “unity” slogan is becoming more of a cover for the nefarious Stalinist machinations.
In the process, CIO progressivism is fading as it fails to meet new issues squarely and militantly. Compromises will hardly stand any real discussion.
 
Faces Dilemma
Nor can the dilemma facing the CIO be met merely as in the old days, namely by evading a clear-cut stand. Will the CIO seriously launch a fight against American participation in the second world war? This involves a sharp break with the Roosevelt administration. A call for a labor party? This week will decide.
The unemployed know that unemployment is terrible. The question they ask Lewis is, what are you going to do about it? Will the CIO organize the WPA and relief workers to fight for their rights?
Lewis by his mild attack on the National Labor Relations Board and his concentration of fire on Vice-President Garner, instead of naming Roosevelt as responsible for WPA cuts, etc., reveals that he still intends to drift along, hoping for the best.
Only to the extent that rank and file pressure for a militant,independent and clear-cut program is manifested at this convention will the CIO be able to advance in the coming period in addition to holding on to its present forces. Otherwise, a further disintegration of this industrial union movement, which remains on a historical plane as progressive in relation to the AFL, is the menace of the coming period.
 



A conference on war prices was initiated by Labor’s Non-Partisan League of Massachusetts for the coming weekend at Boston.
No doubt, this is the beginning of a national move on this problem by affiliates of the CIO and by certain forces within the union movement, and it deserves considerable attention.
The official call for the conference states:
“One week after the beginning of war, wholesale prices of 30 foods had jumped 17 percent.
“No one knows how soon still higher prices, speculative or real, may seriously confront one and one half million in Massachusetts.
“The time to begin to organize for action is NOW.
“Labor, consumer, cooperative, farmer and social groups are cooperating to make this conference an effective step to protect standards of living.
Price Councils
“We urge you to take part in its program, which includes the following definite objectives:

“1. To create permanent War Price Councils, on a state, city and neighborhood basis.
“2. To support utmost use of existing federal, state and municipal safeguards against unjustified price increases.
“3. To supplement, legislation defending living standards. To create neighborhood buying groups, able to deal directly with farmers’ marketing cooperatives.”

The quick response of the CIO unions to the pressure of increased cost of living this fall indicates that such an appeal will meet with general approval. Many CIO unions have demanded a revision of contracts to allow for negotiations on immediate wage increases, as we recently discussed in this column.
 
Action Is Real Key
Direct action by the CIO unions is still the main job in the next period. However, there is nothing wrong in supplementary action provided it takes a proper course. Neither, it must be added, can take the place of a serious struggle against war, as the main way of fighting the evils attending imperialist war.
Participation in this and other conferences of a similar nature must proceed from this point of view if the labor movement is to accomplish its aims.
A blunt warning is in order too. Grave doubt can be expressed about the real nature and meaning of the Massachusetts conference under its present auspices.
Knowing what a stranglehold the Stalinists have had of the LNPL in that area, this looks suspiciously like another device to create a new “front” organization to replace those collapsing under the stigma of “stooge outfits.”
Every serious trade unionist must fight strongly against any attempt of the Stalinists to capture control or maintain it over an organization which many workers want.
Unless this is a preliminary step of the genuine union elements, the conference and similar ones will be sterile and serve only the interests of the Stalinists.
 
Too Vague
The vague character of the three-point program likewise doesn’t tend to create enthusiasm for what it claims to be its purpose.
The first conference if it is to have value, must answer more specifically how the war price councils will fight against increasing costs of living.
Getting more concrete about utilizing federal, state and municipal safeguards against “unjustified” price increases is also highly in order.
Unless these qualifications can be removed, one must state categorically that the whole move is doomed in advance to mere shadow-boxing with the problem of increased cost of living, with the additional curse of Stalinism tainting it.
 

