

AS LATE AS the year 1896 an English historian like Bryce was able to announce in his well-known work, The American Commonwealth, that the same thing could be said about American foreign policy as about the snakes in Iceland: there was no such creature.
In 1898 the United States was a world power conducting a colonial policy with the perfect consciousness of her major imperialist interests.
The factual history of this seemingly astounding transformation is very simple and quite transparent. But the American, i.e., capitalist school of historians persists in pretending that it was sheer coincidence that America entered the Spanish war to emancipate “little” Cuba and concluded it by a bloody subjugation of the Philippines. The liberal historian Beard (a very “critical” man) does not go beyond a mild surmise that a “number of active politicians had early perceived the wider implications of a war with Spain”; and he denies that there is any reason for even “believing that all who sat at the President’s inner council table had at the time any such definite imperial design.”
The Spanish-American war is vaguely explained, as a rule, by the hysteria drummed by the “yellow press” (Hearst, Pulitzer and Co.). Says a Professor at Clark University: “The newspaper press of the time inflamed popular passion till almost any lie received currency.” (A.L.P. Dennis, Adventures in American Diplomacy, p. 63.) “Certain newspapers, notably those owned by William Randolph Hearst, fanned the flames.” (L.B. Shippee, Recent American History, p. 238.)
But, of course, they all insist that there was no connection at all between a campaign in the press, and the policy pursued by the government. “No considerable group of people or politicians talked of annexation or conquest.” (F.L. Paxson, Recent History of the US, p. 275.) A Harvard historian, Archibald C. Coolidge, remarks blandly: “It was not merely that the Americans had a natural sympathy for the insurgents as a people striving to free themselves from tyranny, but they were tired of a commotion at their very door.” (A.C. Coolidge, US As a World Power, p. 128.) And Chester Lloyd Jones ably sums up as follows:
“At the end of the century the US came into conflict with Spain the result of which made her a holder of both Caribbean and Asiatic colonies. This war, however, was a development of no conscious imperialism, and one but slightly, if at all, connected with the movement for increased colonial holdings in which the European powers had been engaged.” (Jones, Caribbean Interests of the US, p. 19.)
And to prove that the American people were acting from no selfish motives, Congress proclaimed that it had no annexations in mind, passing the Teller resolution to this effect, after a week’s debate on McKinley’s war message (April 18, 1898). [1]
The authority from Harvard tells us that “This self-denying ordinance was voted in a moment of excitement, and in all sincerity.” (Coolidge, op. cit., p. 129.)
And another authority swears, “This ... resolution gave the war the appearance of altruism and was undoubtedly sincerely approved by the great majority of Americans.” (A.L.P. Dennis, op. cit., p. 75.)
To introduce a slightly sour note into this symphony of excitement, altruism and sincerity, we quote from still another authority. Months before the battleship Maine was sunk (on September 21, 1897), one, Theodore Roosevelt, the then Assistant Secretary of the Navy, wrote to another gentleman not unknown to Harvard, Henry Cabot Lodge, that in the event of war: “Our Asiatic squadron should blockade and if possible take Manila.” Lodge, replying a little later, remarks with satisfaction: “Unless I am utterly and profoundly mistaken, the Administration is now fully committed to the large policy that we both desire.” (Our emphasis.) They at least seemed to know what was at stake, and how to get it.
As we already know, an uprising flared up in Cuba. Spain was very sorry, and very ready to conciliate. Suddenly the battleship Maine blew up in Havana harbor.



“Remember the Maine!
To Hell with Spain!”



To hell with peace talk. The war was on.
No sooner were hostilities declared, than, strange to tell, a national uprising immediately flared in the Philippines – far, far away on the Pacific Ocean, and belonging to Spain. Through a mysterious coincidence, the American “Asiatic” Fleet happened to be nearby. Battleships and revolutions have an affinity. Since the Americans did not want to have their ships blown up, there was nothing to do except to attack Manila and blow up the Spanish fleet ... although, as a newspaper wit remarked at the time, the American people “didn’t know whether they [the Philippines] were islands or canned goods”.
The American people were dumbfounded.
“Astonishment bordering upon bewilderment seized the American public ... that it [the war] should have reverberations in the Orient was beyond comprehension. Slowly it was understood that freeing Cuba was not a simple proposition.” (L.B. Shippee, op. cit., p. 244.)
Such a slow and complex proposition deserves a little attention. We shall try to establish a few facts about this happy coincidence. Everybody knows what Dewey did, once he got to Manila and fired another shot that “was heard around the world”. But who got Dewey to Manila? Who timed the long, long journey so nicely? None other than our frank correspondent, the mere Assistant Secretary.
“The vessels on the Asiatic station had recently received a new commander, after a fortunate selection which was less due to merit than to politics. Assistant Secretary Roosevelt was responsible for the detail of George Dewey to the post ...” (F.L. Paxson, op. cit., p. 279.)
Obviously, we are dealing with people who are fortunate in everything they do!
But let us hear more about Roosevelt’s “own” actions:
“In advance of the message of April 11 [McKinley’s war message to Congress] he [T.R. himself] had taken the responsibility of ordering Dewey to proceed to Hong Kong there to clean ship and outfit, and thence in the event of war to proceed to Manila ...” (Ibid.)
When Dewey, who was appointed not so much on merit as because of “political considerations”, arrived in Hong Kong, he was shocked by the news that the eventuality had become a fact.
“Three days after the beginning of the war, on April 24, a British proclamation of neutrality made it impossible for Dewey to continue at Hong Kong. The war itself had brought into operation the orders he had received from Secretary Roosevelt.” (Ibid., p. 276.)
This is corroborated by L.B. Shippee who says:
“In accordance with plans worked out largely [!!!] by Theodore Roosevelt, Assistant Secretary of the Navy, Commodore Dewey commanding the Asiatic squadron, proceeded from his station at Hong Kong to the Philippines. There was little else to do: Dewey could not remain at Hong Kong without being interned for the duration of the war; the only alternatives were making for a home post, thousands of miles away, or striking at and securing some position upon enemy territory ...” (Recent American History, p. 244.)
But Dewey apparently did more than he was instructed. For in addition to “cleaning ships, etc.”, he somehow got in touch with Aguinaldo, who was the leader of the previous native revolt against Spanish rule. Dewey made a deal with Aguinaldo. There has been a considerable controversy over this deal.
“Even today just what sort of arrangement was made between Dewey and Filipinos is in doubt.” (L.B. Shippee, op. cit., p. 257.)
It is generally agreed that it was an unfortunate misunderstanding. Aguinaldo insists that Dewey had promised him independence for the Philippines. Dewey on his part violently denies this. True, a misguided historian like N.W. Stephenson asserts rashly that Aguinaldo set up a nominal republic which “Dewey recognized as if it were an actual state.” (A History of the American People, p.989.) But as Archibald C. Coolidge correctly points out:
“The American government ... gave Aguinaldo no promise whatever. Indeed, Admiral Dewey and the consul at Hong Kong could in no wise commit the administration in a matter of such importance.” (US As a World Power, p. 153.)
The entire trouble arose as a result of the fact that the negotiations were carried on by word of mouth through an interpreter. We can not do better than quote Archibald again:
“There has been much heated discussion about the extent to which the Americans committed themselves to the support of Aguinaldo in their original compact with him ... In trying to reconcile the different versions of what was agreed upon, it must be remembered that the negotiating was done through an interpreter. Translations of this kind, with the best of intentions and every precaution are notoriously unsafe ... We have no proof that the words exchanged between Aguinaldo and Mr. Wildman in Hong Kong, in May 1898, were correctly rendered from one to the other. Who knows whether the interpreter even tried to be exact? And admitting he did, a misunderstanding is easy to conceive.” [2] (Ibid., p. 153.)
One thing is clear: Aguinaldo was left with the consoling thought that “misunderstandings” of this sort must have played a considerable role in the history of capitalist expansion.
Thanks to this misunderstanding the Filipinos fought and died for the rule of the Yankee imperialists while thinking that they were fighting for their own independence.
Aguinaldo and his Filipinos were very badly needed. The American imperialists had a few difficulties to overcome before their plans could be smoothly realized. First, there were the dumb and pathetic “Populists” and “Democrats”, who unfortunately had too many votes in Congress, and who had to be led by their noses carefully, lest they upset the apple-cart. They made enough trouble as it was with their “altruistic” revolution, which made Whitelaw Reid foam at his mouth. But worse yet, McKinley, the figurehead as President, was in a constant panic lest somehow the entire sincerity and altruism should plop into the open. He was constantly getting down on his knees and praying, while others, like Roosevelt, were working away like beavers to provide against every possible contingency. Small wonder that our frank Assistant Secretary lost his temper and barked: “McKinley had no more backbone than a chocolate eclair.”
True, Lodge kept hammering away, prodding and planning. Porto Rico was already secure, but the Philippines were not quite so safe. In May 1898 (and a merry month it must have been!) he writes to Theodore, who was then aching to become a real Rough Rider, that there was no hurry about Cuba but that substantial land and naval forces should be rushed to Philippines. (Cf., Beard, Rise of American Civilisation, p. 375.)
But one cannot do everything at once ... not even if one happens to be an imperialist par excellence, as all these gentlemen were. One has to wait for “consequences”, and the “needs” that they engender.
“The immediate consequence of Dewey’s victory at Manila was a need for an occupying army ... the fleet was destroyed but Dewey had no troops to grasp the fruits of victory ...” Emilio Aguinaldo was brought to the islands (what foresight!) “for the purpose of keeping the revolt alive.” (F.L. Paxson, op. cit., p. 277)
In short, no Filipinos “revolting” – no fruits to be plucked! But, fortunately they were there to fight. Dewey made sure of that by bringing Aguinaldo on a warship. He also supplied him with money and ammunition. Meanwhile, McKinley made speeches. Said he: “There is a very general feeling that the United States, whatever it might prefer as to the Philippines, is in a situation where it cannot let go”. Meanwhile, Secretary of State Hay first proceeded to write remarkable diplomatic documents in which he said that the Philippine Islands must be allowed to remain with Spain, only to understand suddenly (on June 3, 1898) that this would have to be “modified” because “the insurgents there have become an important factor in the situation and must have just consideration in any terms of settlement”. And finally, (thank God), Lodge’s instructions were carried out. General Merrill set sail with “an advance guard of two regiments” and arrived at Manila with “instructions to ignore Aguinaldo and establish a provisional government under American auspices.” (N.W. Stephenson, A History of the American People, p. 982.)
When we consider the difficulties under which this phase of American history was made, we stand aghast. One unforeseen difficulty after another! No sooner was Dewey really equipped to “grasp the fruits of victory”, than the war unfortunately came to an end, that is to say, an armistice had been signed. (Lodge had warned that there was no hurry about Cuba, but even Roosevelt, it seems, was fallible.)
However, this was a mere technicality. Due to faulty communications the news did not arrive in time, and three days after the signing of the armistice, Merill stormed Manila. Of course, the Filipino army was already there. But “Aguinaldo was induced to withdraw from Manila, pending the completion of the treaty.” (Ibid., p. 982.)
The inefficient Spaniards raised a howl, insisting that an armistice was an armistice, no matter what sorts of faulty communications obtained, let alone “misunderstandings”. But the American government flatly refused to accede the demand that the status quo of August 12 be restored. However, it was ready to be broad-minded. The American government accepted the “principle” that the islands had not been conquered. The Spaniards collected $20,000,000. But no doubt, the enlightened American Commissioners all felt that it was not the money but the principle that counted. This Commission was composed of Day (first Secretary of State under McKinley), Davis (Senator from Minnesota), Frye (Senator from Maine), and Whitelaw Reid (editor of the New York Tribune) – all these men are admitted even by capitalist historians to have been “avowed imperialists”. No one was more qualified to settle the war than those who started it Besides, no one else could be trusted.
It transpired during the negotiations that Aguinaldo and his friends had entirely false notions on many subjects, their own importance included. “The insurgents, moreover, represented a relatively small group.” (L.B. Shippee, op. cit., p. 252.) And F.L. Paxson is able to say with a sigh of relief and sorrow in retrospect that: “The date of victory at Manila marks the entry of the United States against its will upon an imperial course.” (Recent History of the US, p. 277.)
When the unenlightened Filipinos finally realized what had happened to them “against their will”, they tried to turn their guns against the Americans. And the unwilling Americans proceeded to teach them a few things about American concentration camps and American methods of civilizing backward people. Aguinaldo himself was finally captured in February 1901. Perhaps by then he was no longer capable of becoming astonished. After all, accidents can happen. But these are merely the flowers, the berries are still ahead.
If it was not another misunderstanding, it was certainly at least an accident that during this self-same Spanish-American War a revolution broke out ... this time in the Hawaiian Islands, also in the Pacific Ocean, but, it is true, not the property of Spain. Yet, on the other hand, of tremendous naval importance.
Coolidge, the historian, informs us that according to the opponents of imperialism in the United States, “the revolution by which the Queen had been overthrown was a usurpation of power by a handful of foreigners who would never have succeeded but for the landing of American troops” (p. 134).
The anti-imperialists were not merely muck-raking. In 1893, a Committee of Public Safety “largely [!!!] composed of Americans and having the support of the American Minister Mr. Stevens, seized control of the government in Honolulu” and overthrew Queen Liliuokalani. (A.L.P. Dennis, Adventures in American Dipplomacy, p. 103.)
Said the Minister Mr. Stevens at the time (1893) : “The Hawaiian pear is now fully ripe, and this is the golden hour for the US to pluck it.” The eloquent Minister was a connoisseur of fruit, but he was mistaken in his “golden hour”. Cleveland was then president, a man of inadequate girth and vision – a “larger” man was needed to herd the recalcitrant petty bourgeois in Congress.
Said McKinley in 1898: “We need Hawaii just as much and a good deal more than we did California. It is manifest destiny.” The accommodating press screamed about the designs of the Japanese (to say nothing of the Germans) on Hawaii. “Extravagant tales”, comments one historian. Even more extravagant Congressmen yelled that American speculators had purchased $5,000,000 of Hawaiian bonds at 30 cents on the dollar and it was they who wanted to annex Hawaii so that the United States treasury would have to assume the responsibility for the worthless Hawaiian paper. Of all creatures, the petty bourgeois is the most extravagant! Sober men (Republicans) pointed out that the “Hawaiian Islands were necessary to the defense of the Philippines which in turn were necessary to defend American interests in the Far East.” (Beard, op. cit., p. 375.) And sobriety carried the day.
“The annexation was carried out during the excitement of the Spanish War, not by treaty – for fear that the necessary two-thirds majority could not be secured in the Senate – but by joint resolution of the two Houses of Congress.” (Coolidge, op. cit., p. 135.)
As a matter of fact, it was impossible to secure the two-thirds vote of the Senate, and that is why recourse was had to the device of 1845. McKinley signed the “joint resolution of annexation” on July 7 (a few days after General Merrill had reached Manila).
All of which entitles American historians to say in chorus: “Another unforeseen [?] result of the war affected the Hawaiian Islands.” (L.B. Shippee, op. cit., p. 248.)
The Peace of Paris, December 10, 1898, liquidated completely the colonial empire of Spain, the empire that had been crumbling to pieces, while so many hungry mouths were slavering. American imperialists took practically everything: Cuba, Porto Rico, the Philippines (3,000 odd islands), Guam, etc. What an extraordinary and choice selection! An astounding harvest, plucked in one “Golden War”! “Internationally there was astonishment at the outcome.” (L.B. Shippee, op. cit., p. 245.) “To the greater part of Europe the war itself, and the course which it took came as an unpleasant surprise.” (Coolidge, op. cit., p. 130.)
They have good reasons to gloat. A single glance at a map is sufficient to make clear that here was no accidental colonial grab – like that perpetrated by the German imperialists in their day, or by Mussolini and his crew today – but a painstaking, fully considered, consciously planned and executed preparation of US imperialism for its struggle for the richest colonial prize in the world – the outlets of the Orient fronting the Pacific Ocean.
“They gave the Americans a stronger strategic position in the Gulf of Mexico, and in the Caribbean sea, coaling stations in the Pacific, and a base of operations in the Far East.” (Coolidge, op. cit., p.130.)
The Philippines are strategically located in respect to the most developed section of China, its southern section (Canton), just as Japan is located strategically in respect to Northern China and Manchuria. At the same time the Philippines provide a “base of operations” in the struggle for the Dutch Indies, and (whisper it!) India itself.
The Hawaiian Islands are a midway base en route to the Far East, of vital naval and military importance. Between the Hawaiian Islands, Asia and Australia there is nothing except the Islands of Fiji. Therefore, as Mahan, the American naval expert states, “the Hawaii are of utmost importance”. As far back as 1892, when England and France toyed with the idea of plucking the Hawaiian “pear”, the US government flatly declared that it would not tolerate the colonization of these islands by any European power, and would intervene with force of arms, if need be.
Porto Rico flanks the British and French possessions in the Antilles.
And as for Cuba – “the Pearl of the Antilles” – let us have an expert’s appraisal of a jewel like that!
“A glance at the map is enough to convince anyone of the unique importance of this island to the United States. Strategically it commands at one end the entrance to the Gulf of Mexico – the outlet to the huge Mississippi Valley – and at the other it fronts on the Caribbean Sea, and any future isthmian canal.” (Coolidge, op. cit., p. 124. In 1908!)
American imperialists could not take the bull by the horns and set to the task of solving the question of the Panama Canal, that is, of a direct route to Asia, unless they had first seized Cuba and Porto Rico, unless they had beforehand guaranteed their key harbors to the Orient, and had established their “interests in the Far East” that must henceforth be so preciously protected.
After the Spanish-American War, “it [the United States] was now in a situation, as well as in a mood, to take up the canal question with an energy it had never before shown.” (Coolidge, op. cit., p. 275.)
“The lessons of the Spanish-American War were clearly before the American people: a canal was an urgent necessity both from a naval and commercial point of view.” (A.L.P. Dennis, op. cit., p. 157.)
In the above article we have dealt with the ways and means whereby the American imperialists prepared for a big job. In the next article we shall deal with their methods of actually building the “big ditch”. [3]
 
Footnotes
1. The text of the Teller resolution:
“That the US hereby disclaims any disposition or intention to exercize sovereignty, jurisdiction or control over said Island except for the pacification thereof and asserts its determination, when that is accomplished, to leave the government and control of the Island to its people.”
2. The capitalist historians are greatly fetched by this explanation and do not tire of playing with it.
“Probably, however, the Filipinos, forced [?] to carry on much of their intercourse through interpreters, allowed their expectation to color their view of the agreement, since all Americans involved in the matter deposed that no promises of any kind were made.” (L.B. Shippee, Recent American History, p. 257.)
3. Publication of The New International was suspended before the publication of the next issue as the Workers Party entered the Socialist Party. So far we have been unable to find out whether the second part was ever published. – ETOL
Transcriber’s note
A. The best online chronology of the 1898 Spanish-American War is to be found in the Library of Congress’ presentation The World of 1898: The Spanish-American War. In addition the following short overview can be consulted with profit: Hobart Spalding, U.S. imperialism and 1898, Monthly Review, 50 (7) December 1998. The best online source on the subsequent Filipino Insurrection (1899–1902), in which American soldiers massacred more than a quarter of a million civilians, is the Geocities website The Philippine-American War, now available at Archive.org. [In addition there is a section of The History Guy Website on the Philippine-American War.]  An excellent article comparing the Philippine-American War (celebrated by the British Nobel laureate Rudyard Kipling in his February 1899 poem The White Man’s Burden: The United States and The Philippine Islands) with the current wars in Afghanistan and Iraq is Kipling, the ‘White Man’s Burden,’ and U.S. Imperialism, by The Editors, Monthly Review, Vol. 55, No. 6. November 2003. The best book on the rise of the Anti-Imperialist League in the United States due to the American atrocities in the Philippines is no longer available online: Daniel B. Schirmer, Republic or Empire: American Resistance to the Philippine War, Cambridge, Mass.: Schenkman Publishing Co., 1972; Revised Edition, 2003. Jim Zwick’s www.boondocksnet.com website was a crucial source for materials on the Philippine-American War, contemporary responses to Kipling’s White Man’s Burden, and Mark Twain s anti-imperialist writings. [This site is unfortunately no longer online and has been excluded from Archive.org.] (Amended 15 March 2018 by Einde O’Callaghan)
 


Marching! Marching!
By Clara Weatherwax.
John Day Co. New York. $1.90.
It is, certainly, a desperate scramble for the hangers-on of the communist party to keep up with the impulsive party line these days. The unfortunate faithful can’t tell when they go to bed tonight what political principles they will believe tomorrow. They have to read the morning’s Daily Worker before they know how to greet the socialist next door and the minister down the block.
Clara Weatherwax, whose novel won the New Masses “prize contest for a novel on an American proletarian theme”, fortunately manages to get under the current wire. True enough, she must have been a little worried by the Seventh Congress – which took place, evidently, after her manuscript was finished. She has plenty of “united [front” (though it is not at all clear just who is being united), but there is a sad lack of “People’s Front”. And she still clings to a deviation or two on the AF of L. You can almost gather from her book that there are several labor fakers left among the old-line bureaucrats. And she has, I am forced to report, some quite disrespectful things to say about churchmen which will doubtless keep Marching! Marching! off the American League’s preferred list.
But these are after all minor matters. An introductory notice is proudly able to announce:
“Clara Weatherwax stems from pre-Mayflower New England stock, which has pioneered across the American continent ... One of her outstanding forebears was Roger Williams. Fourteen of her direct ancestors fought in the first American revolution. Others fought in the War of 1812 and the Civil War, and many of her family were in the World War.”
This should certainly be able to qualify her – even for Stalinism, 1936 variety. It is one of her own worker-heroes who comes through on page 208 with the triumphant discovery: “‘They talk about radical foreign stuff! Say, Communism is Americanism! That’s what! Americanism!’” As Earl Browder might put it: “That’s just what we communists have been trying to tell you all along, and in particular since the question was so decisively analyzed by comrade Dimitroff.” And, no doubt, the claim will be amply proved as US imperialism moves forward into the new world war.
As for the novel itself, it is a travesty on literature and a libel against the working class. Its style is the dregs of the Joyce tradition, drained off through the worst of Wolfe and Faulkner, combined with school-essay “straightforward” writing. Its characters are wooden monstrosities, conceived with a kind of horrible masochistic delight in repulsive details and an infantile pleasure in trivial nobilities. The book is liberally interlarded with long speeches on war, strikes, trade unions, Fascism, apparently lifted from back copies of the Daily Worker.
What is tragic is to realize that even in a book so bad as this there are materials, lost in the morass, for genuine and even great literature. Not the least in the charges of the indictment against Stalinism must be the stultification of intelligence and sensibility to which it condemns its adherents.
J.W.
 



Business is picking up again ... where it left off when last heard from just before the nosedive into the misery and privations of the last six years.
With millions unemployed, factories shut down, bankruptcy abroad, the farmers pauperized, etc. Great Truths remained unspoken. It was forgotten that this was the best of all possible worlds; that the rich begot profits as a reward for their initiative, honesty and diligence while the poor got all that was coming to them for being lazy, for cultivating vices instead of virtues, and their incapacity to seize an opportunity to rise in the world. Business’ great service to Humanity was forgotten. All of its self-sacrifice and nobility. All of its toil and tribulations. All forgotten!
 
The Unkind Era
Demagogues sang a different tune to the millions out of work, and the millions being pauperized. Fallacy after fallacy was propagated. A New Deal was dangled before those who thought they suffered from the Old Deal. A lot of unkind things were said about Business. But that was long, long ago.
The demagogues have done their work, kept the people amused with promises to make them forget how they were being squeezed until profits could start rolling in again. Now it seems that profits are actually rolling in. Business, so long in the background, is raising its voice again to tell all the Bill Joneses, Smiths and you and me who have been deluded by demagogues just where we are, and where we get off.
By way of inaugurating the new year and the “new era,” the New York Sun lets loose the Voice of Business in a monster Special Issue. On page 2 of this issue we are reminded of the Supreme Truth of Business:
 
“It’s Your Own Fault”
“You and I know from actual experience that nine out of ten of the poor ... remained so because of their refusal to accept their opportunities and because of their own vices. We know that nine out of every ten, rich, middle class or poor, who have made ago of things have done so because of their initiative and honesty.”
During the depression a fallacy became widespread that an insignificant minority of the rich owned the world, keeping the millions of Bill Joneses to starve and slave in it. A most dangerous fallacy. So the very first article is entitled:
“Two Percent Control the Wealth! What of It – If They Do?”
This article reminds and teaches Bill Jones not only about the moral abyss between the rich and the poor, but also about “the wide distinction between, control and ownership” or, as the subtitle reads: “He Learns, Too, Where Billions Grow and Who Gets Them.”
There is a “great difference” between control and ownership. Yes, indeed. Two percent only “control” the wealth of this country. What could be more democratic than such control? One “controller” for every fifty “recipients”! That’s better than in the army, to say nothing about jails. This two percent makes billions sprout and passes them out to the Bill Joneses (that’s anonymous for you and me). On page 2, Business supplies a chart which proves it, and on page 3, Mr. P.S. Arkwright blurts it out in so many words:
 
Bill Jones Gets Every Nickel
“Another oft repeated fallacy is that ‘the workers’ share of the national income has been steadily decreasing? This, too, is untrue. The workers’ share in the national income moved from 38% in1850 to 65% in 1929. In 1931 and 1932, it equalled 75% to 80% of the income actually produced, and was even more in the case of manufacturing and related industries ...”
There you have it in black and white. Business makes billions grow only in order to distribute them to the poor, lazy, vicious and otherwise immoral working men. Well, indeed, can the spokesmen for business fling back in the teeth of its maligners the charge that Business, a two percent minority, runs the country as it suits its purposes and interests. There are charts and speeches and articles by the score to prove the virtue of Business. And to top it all, Business gets less and less for its remark.ble “control” of the country’s wealth:
 
The Poor Rich
“Another oft repeated fallacy is that corporation profits increase faster than workers’ wages. This is likewise untrue ...” (p. 3)
It is untrue that the poor are getting poorer and the rich richer. Mr. Arkwright has statistics to prove that it is the rich who are getting poorer, while the poor get all (or almost all) the billions.
During the depression a great ado was made about profits. You’d think there was nothing but profit for capitalists. As a matter of fact the “nominal ownership of capital” hardly pays at all. Profits are largely a myth. Bill Jones does not know this. Of course not. Bill is not only immoral and lazy but ignorant to boot. But Prof. Allyn Young, a great man and scholar, knows all about profit and loss. And Business agrees with Prof. Young, and vice versa:
“Prof. Allyn Young, one of our greatest economists, used to say that he doubted whether, taking all enterprise together, there was such a thing as profit; that losses equaled profit over a reasonable rate of interest” (page 5).
 
Losses for Bosses
Thus, business makes billions grow where only grass grew previously; Business passes the billions on to the Joneses, and gets nothing in the end for it ... Hard to believe, harder to understand, but there it is. The New York Sun has a whole issue that proves it. There are charts testifying to it. Professor Young says so. Experience verifies it. Take the case of the Chrysler Corporation. On page 40, this great corporation submits a public account of how it grew billions for a period of ten years, and what happened to these billions. Labor got billions in wages, Business got millions in profits, and in the end Chrysler’s losses just about equalled the profit.
Statistics are very complicated and boring, but statistics prove this to the hilt.
 
Chrysler’s Misfortune
In ten years the Chrysler Corporation grew two and a half billion dollars; and today it hasn’t a penny of it left. It was all distributed. And here is how:

$1,790,000,000 went for materials, general expenses and advertising. “The greater part (of this amount) went into jobs and wages of workers in industries supplying the automobile manufacturing industry” (p. 40; our emphasis). In other words, the above sum was largely spent to pay wages “indirectly.” Indirect wages, as it were.
 
In addition to this huge sum which went to pay workers “elsewhere,” Chrysler paid “directly to Chrysler Corporation’s employees ... nearly $490,000,000” (p. 40). Direct wages.
 
On top of this, there “was expended for additional facilities for the increased volume of business $111,000,000.” And, in the nature of things, again “a large part of this $111,000,000 ... provided work to many individuals employed by vendors of these supplies” (p. 40). In short, Bill Jones got that too.
 
The taxes took – $71,000,000.What Bill Jones did not get, his (Jones’s) government grabbed, to pass it on to him in the way of schools, hospitals, and other services.

Add these four items, and what do you get? $2,462,000,000. Out of an income of some $2,500,000,000, only $38,000,000, or just about 1½ percent remained for the corporation. Chrysler grew billions, Jones gathered the harvest.
 
Out of Its Own Pocket
Assuredly Mr. Arkwright (who writes in general on page 3 about the activities that Chrysler reports in particular on page 40) knew what he was saying when he delivered his address at the University of Georgia. If anything, Mr. Arkwright was too mild in his estimate of the workers’ share in the income actually produced in the manufacturing and related industries. The workers’ share in the Chrysler Corporation income is so close to 99.9 percent that it hurts the corporation even to talk about it. The corporation merely gritted its teeth and shut up and proceeded to pay profits. With the $38,000,000 it had left, the corporation proceeded to pay out to the “bondholders $84,000,000,” and the stockholders “approximately $79,000,000.” In other words, the corporation paid out a cool $125,000,000 out of its own pocket. It paid profits at a loss,paying out, according to its own balance sheet (p. 40) some 163 million in profits, thus losing $125,000,000 in the process. To paraphrase Prof. Allyn, “taking the Chrysler enterprise over a period of ten years, there is no such thing as profit: losses just about equal profit.”
 
Operating for Philanthropy
This just about makes Chrysler a prospective bankrupt. But Chrysler does not complain. No. The corporation proudly points out that these dividends are “paid out of earnings which, through prudent management, the corporation has been able to set aside, after paying the cost of operating the business.” (p. 40)
Moreover, according to its own statement, “few corporations in the United States have been able to maintain such consistent returns to investors throughout the last ten years” (p. 40). Obviously, the other corporations in this country are traveling even faster on the road of making profits equal losses than Chrysler. They operate their enterprises, it seems, only to keep pumping billions into the hands of the shiftless Joneses.
 
Soak the Poor
“Sound finance today obviously calls for the lowering of rates of taxation in the higher brackets and a real stiffening of the rates in the lower brackets accompanied by a reduction of the exemptions. But a combination more unattractive politically can scarcely be conceived. There is danger (hear! hear!) that if the task is faced at all some device which throws the added burden of taxation less obviously on those with small means will he preferred ...” (p. 5).
Justice, to say nothing of sound finance demands that the poor (or as Mr. May mildly calls them “those with small means”) who receive the bulk of the billions should pay the bulk of the taxation. But as Mr. May admits, the rantings of demagogues to say nothing of the greed, selfishness and immorality of the Joneses make it impossible to approach the question openly and on a sound basis. Dangerous subterfuges must be resorted to instead.
Such are the dangers and miseries and hypocrisies of American Big Business.
We are no humanitarians, but even from that standpoint it would be the height of humanitarianism to put Business out of its misery, and silence its Voice once and for all. It is a big but necessary job. And there is only one way to do it: overthrow capitalism, voice and all; and establish the workers’ state. The sooner the workers get down to their own business the better.
 



From the Kremlin down, the Stalinists in the Soviet Union are having the jitters from a recent epoch-making and horrible discovery made by none other than Stalin.
While Stalin and his suite were marching from one “irrevocable” triumph to the next, an unbelievable situation continued to develop in the rear: “On the Historical Front.” While Stalin was busy making history in the very frontlines, his flunkies in the rear were manufacturing it according to the day-to-day prescription. With the changes in the objective situation, the means and ways of falsifying history were varied.
But now it turns out – as a matter of incontrovertible fact (for, Stalin himself says so) – that the science of history in the Soviet Union is, by and large, in the camp of counter-revolution!
The gravity of the situation is illustrated sufficiently by the fact that on January 26, 1936, a special Commission of Twelve, with Zhdanov as Chairman, was appointed by Stalin to save what can be saved.
Naturally, the Commission faces a colossal problem. In its work it runs up against tremendous difficulties. In the words of Pravda itself:
“Strange as it may seem, this work has run up against difficulties in the sphere of the History of the U.S.S.R. It is well worth dwelling upon these difficulties because they concern not a small group of authors but the condition of our Historical Science.” (Leading article in Pravda, Jan. 27, 1936. Our emphasis)
 
“Liquidating” Pokrovsky
On the 19th year of the October revolution, on the very threshold of Communism, after all classes had been irrevocably eliminated, “our historical science” is in such an awful and ominous condition that Stalin must intervene and appoint no less than twelve specialists (including Radek and Bukharin) to relieve the situation. This is not only a strange state of affairs, but a condition well worth looking into.
The first inkling of the crisis “on the historical front” came to the uninitiated in the form of a world-wide attack launched by Stalin’s pen-prostitutes (with Radek at the head) against the historian M.N. Pokrovsky.
This late and unlamented scholar was one of the recognized figureheads of the official school of Stalinist historians. In the textbooks he was invariably referred to as the “Great Historian”, which translated into English means that his particular version of history was assumed by the bureaucracy to be entirely in its own interests. But that was yesterday. Today, Pravda has irrevocably declared that:
“The harmful traditions of the school of M.N. Pokrovsky have not been liquidated in the sphere of the History of the U.S.S.R.” (Jan. 27)
In other words, we have here an official decree to “liquidate” immediately Pokrovsky (already a successful corpse) ... and “his school”. But as we have already learned from Pravda itself, this is not any historian living or dead but a condition of things that surpasses mere liquidation of individuals. The name of Pokrovsky is merely a symbol to denote that the evil extends even to the Hereafter. In point of fact, the Stalinist bureaucracy is now in process of liquidating its own falsification of history served up in its own school books.
 
The Official Decree
The decree issued by the C.E.C. of the C.P.S.U. and the Council of People’s Commissars makes no reference to Pokrovsky or any school but bluntly states the following:
“A Commission composed of comrades Zhdanov (Chairman), Radek, Svanidze, Gorin, Lukin, Yakovlev, Bystrianski, Zatonski, Falsulla Khodjaiev, Bauman, Bubnov and Bukharin is appointed to examine and improve and wherever necessary revise the already written textbooks on history.
“The Commission is empowered to organize groups to examine specific textbooks, and also to announce prize competitions to replace those textbooks which it will find necessary to revise fundamentally. First and foremost are to be examined the textbooks on the elementary course in the History of the U.S.S.R, and Modern History. (Our emphasis)



 


(Signed) J. Stalin
V. Molotov”



We reprint this decree in full because it best characterizes the real appraisal of the condition of the Stalinist Science of History. Stalin (in the name of the C.P.S.U. and the Soviet Union!) has repudiated lock, stock and barrel his own “science.” To our knowledge, this is the first public admission of failure on such a wholesale scale by the Infallible and Beloved Scientist.
But the causes for this remarkable admission, for this sudden evaluation of historical values are very plain and rather simple. Indeed, they can be summed up in a single word: Trotskyism!
Yes, “Trotskyism”, so often liquidated, exterminated and buried by Stalin and his henchmen is now amass movement in the Soviet Union. During the recent “technical check-up”, thousands of Trotskyists were “expelled” from the party. No sooner was this cleansing concluded than it was immediately necessary to institute another purge (this time, a mere exchange of “new party cards for the old and tattered ones”). A persistent drive on a vast scale is now going on to prepare and execute this new purge. We shall content ourselves here by quoting an eloquent paragraph from an article by V. Shuhrikov, secretary of the Quibishev District:
“We must not forget revolutionary vigilance for a single moment. We have no right whatever to think all the alien and hostile class elements have already been exposed and driven out of the party. We have no right to allow our class vigilance to flag for a single moment. We have learned a great deal during the check-up of party credentials. But we must not forget that the class enemy, too, has learned something. For, we exposed not a few double-dealers, Zinovievists, Trotskyists, and all sorts of other anti-Soviet elements whose party papers were in perfect order. As is well known, a section of the Trotskyists, Zinovievists had a close conspirative organization, carrying on their undermining activities under the mask of ‘honest’ and ‘devoted’ party members.” (Pravda, Feb. 3, 1936. Our emphasis)
These words hardly require any comment. Every syllable sounds the alarm. The entire Soviet press is now urging full blast all its local G.P.U. agents to be on guard, not to relax their vigilance for an instant,and not fail “this time” to do a thorough and final job of “unmasking and expelling” the Trotskyists.
 
Contraband in Official Textbooks
The bureaucracy is in a frenzy over the “great deal” that it has learned during the last check-up,and the “great deal” it obviously expects to learn from its present purge (February 1 to May 1) – evidently a great deal more than it had ever surmised. In their fury, the Stalinist usurpers are seeking to plug any possible channel through which revolutionary ideas might seep into the consciousness of the student youth and the new generations of workers.
Today, the Stalinists think that they have uncovered one of the important leaks through which “Trotskyism” finds its way to the masses. No more, no less. The falsifiers of history are certain that their own textbooks are not false enough. The trouble, you see, lies with the way history is being taught in the schools!
“Our historical science” is in a terrible condition, says Pravda. Why? Listen:
“... In the sphere of Russian history, there has not yet (!) been accomplished the work of scrapping non-Bolshevik traditions which ... comrade Stalin (posed) in his work Some Questions Relating to the History of Bolshevism, which, as is well known, posed in its full scope before our historians the question of liquidating semi-Menshevist, semi-Centrist ideas, and Trotskyist contraband in our historical literature.”
 
Radek Whines
A task set by Stalin in January 1932 remains “unfulfilled” by January 1936. What was Stalin doing all this time? He was very busy. Small wonder, that Radek was instructed to write a tremendous article in the self-same issue of Pravda (Jan. 27). Our Mademoiselle Fifi in journalism, too, whines:
“Our historians have not yet assimilated the great historical legacy of Marx, Engels and Lenin; thisi s very clearly proved by the very fact of the supremacy of the school of Pokrovsky in the sphere of Russian history, by the fact of the insurmountable influence of Luxemburgism and Trotskyism, in the treatment of modern history as a whole, at a time when the stormy course of history has placed the historians face to face with a whole series of questions of paramount importance.” (Our emphasis)
Their own falsified history looms as a source of danger in the storms they see ahead. The “enemy” lurks in most unexpected places. Even the Captain himself is no great comfort against the tempest. He adds his own thunderbolts to the already overcast skies, and only provides the enemy with ammunition.
 
A “Faction of Communism’’
He is thundering today as he did in August 8, 1934 against the fact that the textbooks do not properly treat: “the struggle; of tendencies in the ruling Communist Party in the U.S.S.R., and the struggle against Trotskyism as a manifestation of petty bourgeois counter-revolution.” (Decree signed by Stalin, Zhdanov, and Kirov, August 8, 1934). But in January 1932 he also thundered against the wrong line of his historians: “There are some Bolsheviki who are of the opinion that Trotskyism is a faction of Communism, and though it is erroneous and commits foolish and even anti-Soviet acts still it is a faction of Communism”; and he called upon all historian to struggle against Trotsyism as the “advanced troop of the counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie” (On Some Questions Relating to the History of Bolshevism, see The Communist, p. 75, Jan. 1932). Yet Stalin himself insisted that Trotskyism was (once upon a time) a “faction of Communism”. Back in the same year, 1932, after Stalin had already “posed in its full scope before the historians the question of liquidating ... Trotskyist contraband in our historical literature,” one of his zealous historians immediately tried to oblige him by broadcasting the historical fact that Trotskyism never had anything to do with Communism, being an unadulterated and permanent species of counter-revolution. What did Stalin do? Absorbed as he was constructing socialism in the Soviet Union, and helping Hitler come into power in Germany, he nevertheless took time off to reply to this historian, one Olekhnovich. Chiding him, he wrote:
 
Stalin’s Letter
Dear Comrade Olekhnovich,
Your letter received. Excuse the delay as I am overloaded with work.
I find myself utterly unable to agree with you, comrade Olekhnovich. And here is the reason why:
It is not true that Trotskyism was never a faction of Communism ... IT WOULD BE LUDICROUS TO DENY FACTS THAT ARE KNOWN TO EVERYBODY, as a faction in the C.P.S.U., recorded in the resolutions of conventions and congresses of the C.P.S.U. ... (Our emphasis)
Ergo: It is impermissible to assert that Trotskyism (Trotskyites) WERE ALWAYS a faction of Menshevism, for such a supposition must logically lead to the notion that during the period from 1917 to 1927 our party war the party of a BLOC between the Bolsheviks and the Mensheviks, and not a MONOLITHIC Bolshevik party, which is utterly incorrect and incompatible with the foundations of Bolshevism ... (Emphasis in the original)
What other way out remains? Only one, namely: let us agree upon the fact that during a ‘certain historical segment of time’ Trotskyism represented a faction of Communism – a faction vacillating between Bolshevism and Menshevism.



 
(Dated) Jan. 15, 1932


(Signed) J. Stalin
 



Today, any historian, any time,anywhere in the U.S.S.R. who would dare to repeat this species of Stalin’s permanent vacillation would find himself rotting in jail for life.
Only four years ago (see, Bolshevik, No. 16, Aug. 30, 1932, pages 46–48) the Jovial Captain himself was of the opinion that it is absurd to deny “fact known to everybody,”and was obviously convinced that the task of historical science consisted in fitting well-known (and unfortunately recorded) facts into a tissue of “interpretation,” and falsifications. That, in his eyes, was the great merit of the “Pokrovsky school in history”. Under the guise of erudition, facts, dates and documents, they falsified history to meet the needs of their master.
But our Captain, as usual, proved infallibly wrong. Today, he is a danger to himself. Today, his old falsification of history is no longer adequate – it is only 99.9 percent falsified: here and there a fact floats to the surface, and muddle up the clear waters. A new school of historians is therefore necessary. Men unaccustomed to dealing with facts are needed. Men more cunning than the schemer in the fairy-tale who tried to steal Aladdin’s magic lamp.
 




Stakhanov Campaign Gripped by
Serious Crisis in the Soviet Union
For months now the Stalinist press has been filled with ballyhoo for Stakhanovism. The February issue of the Communist Interantional boasts that:
“The words ‘Stakhanovism’ and ‘Stakhanov methods’ have become famous far beyond the confines of the first socialist state in the world.” (p. 351)
At the very height of this campaign, news comes from Moscow, as reported by Harold Denny in the New York Times, that:
“Stakhanovism has fallen back so completely in its birthplace that only one of the many Donetz Basin coal mining units was not falling in its production quota.” (N.Y. Times, March 18)
The breakdown is not limited to the coal industry. The situation is so serious that, according to Denny’s dispatch, it “caused Communist party and government leaders to demand ... that it (i. e. Stakhanovism) be revived and strengthened.”
Is Denny perhaps vilifying Stakhanovism? Is there really a “breakdown”, and how serious is it?
It is impossible as yet to gauge the situation fully, but sufficient facts are already available to enable us to outline it.
The introduction of what Denny calls the “Stakhanov speeding system” indubitably produced results at the outset. If we take the key steel and coal figures as the basis for a general orientation, we find that the output of steel increased from an average production of 35.5 thousand tons in September to 38 thousand tons in December; a like increase was gained in the production of coal (the Donetz Basin) which rose from the average daily output of 178.2 thousand tons in September to 229 thousand tons in December.
These were, so to speak, the honeymoon months of Stakhanovism. In January, we find the steel production still increasing. It rises to an average daily production of 42 thousand tons. But the figures for the coal industry already show a small but indubitable decrease. In January, the average daily output in the Donbas region fell to223 thousand tons of coal. The February figures indicate a levelling off in the production of steel, the industry apparently maintaining its January output of 42 thousand tons per day, while a further decline is indicated in the Donbas coal production (221 thousand tons of coal). The figures of the Second Five Year Plan call for a daily production of 46 thousand tons of steel, and 230.1 [thousand] tons of coal from the Donetz basin.(The above figures have been averaged from the daily data published in Pravda.)
In short, instead of steadily increasing, the output is either remaining stationary or declining. The question naturally arises how are we to reconcile these facts with the claims made by the Stalinists that the “Stakhanov movement ensures a gigantic growth of the productivity of labor ...” etc., etc. (Communist Int., Feb. 1936, p. 35).The answer is that the facts give the lie to the Stalinist boasts.
The inability to maintain levels already attained can signify only one thing: that the gains have been made not so much on the basis of a scientific rationalization of industry as at the expense of an increased physical exertion on the part of the workers. The workers are unable to maintain the intensel abor for more than a few weeks. Their physical exhaustion is reflected in the declining output. Moreover, there are many signs that the workers are resisting the attempts of the bureaucracy to load an intolerable burden on their shoulders. Born a few short months ago, Stakhanovism already faces a crisis.
The economic and cultural development of the U.S.S.R. is no longer compatible with the existence of a usurping, self-willed bureaucracy. This bureaucracy is now a brake upon further development, and it must come into an ever greater conflict with the Soviet proletariat. That is the real meaning of the latest news from the Soviet Union.
* * *

Split in the Swedish C.P.
The European press reports that a split has taken place in the Communist Party of Sweden (section of the Third International).
A considerable section of the Swedish C.P. refused, it seems, to follow blindly the turn toward national defense that was ratified by the Seventh Congress. The section that split has issued its own organ, Proletarian Unity, in which it charges the Third International with having betrayed the revolutionary tradition of Leninism.
The split in Sweden is the first open sign of the opposition that has been rumored to be stirring in the ranks of the Comintern, since the “new turn” was officially sanctioned six months ago. There are also continued rumors of a revolt in the Polish C.P.
The indications are that Stalin and his henchmen will not have internally the same easy sailing with their latest turn as they had with all the preceding zigzags.
* * *

Belgium
A Special Congress of the Belgian Labor Party (P.O.B.) was held on February 22, for the purpose of ratifying the action of Socialist Ministers who had previously approved the military project of Duveze, as demanded by the French General Staff.
These proposals of the Belgian War Department proved somewhat embarrassing to the Socialist Ministers in the coalition Government. They had entered into this coalition ministry with the understanding that no matters relating to the army would be broached until after the next parliamentary elections; and they had been assured by the war ministry that the condition of national defense was perfectly splendid.
Unforeseen contingencies, however, suddenly compelled the Minister of War to demand that the compulsory term of military service be extended 6 months, that more millions be added to the army budget, and so on, in order to guarantee "collective security.” The embarrassed Socialist Ministers did not hesitate for a moment to vote in approval of these measures. But of course, there still remained the task of swinging the trade unions solidly in line. A series of maneuvers and “discussions” followed, culminating in the Special Congress.
It follows as a matter of course that this Congress adopted a resolution which admits “the possibility of a defensive war in certain circumstances.” The resolution goes on to emphasize that such a defensive war in the international sphere “coincides with the struggle against Fascism.” The P.O.B. went, of course, on record in favor of a collective security on the basis of the League Covenant for mutual aid.
Vandervelde, who had “retired” from active service on account of his age, can still summon sufficient strength to remain true to the betrayal of 1914, in company with Messrs. Spaak, De Man and Co.
Last January 25, Vandervelde celebrated his 70th birthday. On this happy occasion the Soviet ambassador to Belgium sent him a gift, no doubt in token of the fact that the preparation for the Second Imperialist War is proceeding full blast under the banner of the Second and Third Internationals.
* * *

Steel for the Slaughter
While the agents of the imperialists are mobilizing the cannon fodder, the steel plants are working the world over to provide the ammunition.
In 1935, the world production of steel and cast iron was double that of the year 1932.
The steel production of the United States has increased 31% over that of 1934. Germany has increased its production 36.5%, taking the lead in Europe. Czechoslovakia showed an increase of 22.6%; Italy, 19.6%; England, 11.9%; Poland, 8.9%.
The rising tempo of the steel production reflects the speed with which the next world slaughter is approaching.
 



In the article of L.D. Trotsky, Historical Objectiveness translated by Max Eastman and reprinted in the last issue of the Militant from the magazine Contempo, a typographical error was responsible for the following sentence, “But the last thing that the author had in mind was to interpret in his book the verdict of the historical process.” Obviously this is a mistake.
Trotsky could never make such a statement. In fact he wrote just the contrary. The error originates in the proofreader’s mixing up two sentences of the original article which reads as follows, “But the last thing the author had in mind was to console anybody. He merely wished to interpret in his book the verdict of the historical process itself.”
Undue liberties were by the way taken, in the translation of the “bureaucratic stratum” (in the Russian mss.) as “the bureaucratic class.” We call the attention of the translator to the fact that in Marxist literature a fundamental distinction is made between “class and “stratum” (or “layer”) – the bureaucracy in the Soviet Union is not a class.
 



The Marxian Theory of the State
by Sherman H.M. Chang, Ph.D.
This book is advertised as “the first scholarly book on the Marxist theory of the state”. Dr. Chang came to write it by chance. Beginning merely out of curiosity with a chapter on Marxian theory, he discovered that no one had written fully on the political theory of Communism, and therefore decided to make a deep study of “this formidable theory of the state”. He devoted two years to this deep study, and accomplished precisely what could be expected from a curiosity that is bolstered up with such concentrated effort. In that time, he managed to become acquainted with a half dozen pamphlets by Lenin, a few extracts by Trotsky, and absolutely nothing of Liebknecbt, Luxemburg, and Mehring, not to mention such “nonentities” as Plekhanov or Kautsky of the pre-revisionist period.
 
Chang’s “Slant” on Marxism
In view of the fact that this book bristles with classic quotations of Marxism, and also because such outstanding theorists as Bedacht and Trachtenberg seem to have been somewhat involved in providing Dr. Chang with a genuine “slant” on Marxism, we intended to go somewhat into the scope of this purported interpretation of Marxist theory, and Chang’s qualifications as a scientist and scholar in general.
In this “Marxian” study of the state, there is practically no mention whatever, made (to say nothing of analysis) of the Russian Revolution of 1905, and the October Revolution. One is led to the suspicion that Chang’s reason for studying the Paris Commune, is the fact that it has had some mention among “his authorities.”
Chang’s scholarship is upon that level which does not transcend scholasticism. The bulk of his bibliography consists of the works of such authorities on Marxism as Max Beer, M.M. Bober, one Kleene, and the like. To prove that historical materialism is monistic, he refers – to the “findings of Kleene and Bober (which serve to strengthen our contention that historical materialism is monistic)”. Although he refers slightingly to Plekhanov as another “great Marxist”, Chang obviously never read Plekhanov’s classic defense of historical materialism. It is only when his own authorities fail him that he resorts to such dubious sources as Trotsky – for example, “since even such an authority ... as Max Beer overlooks this character of the Commune, it is worth while to quote Trotsky.”
 
A Surprising “Discovery”
It is not surprising therefore to find that the Doctor is surprised at the deliberate falsification of Marxism by the revisionists. And, moreover, that from the heights of his erudition, he suspects that even most devoted disciples of Marx were not quite so well informed as he. Chang indirectly imputes to Lenin ignorance of Marx’s The Class Struggles in France. On what ground’s? On the grounds that he did not include two wellvknown quotations from that book in his pamphlet The State and Revolution. According to Chang, “it is interesting to note that such a devoted disciples of Marx had made no mention (of these passages) in his State and Revolution”. Had the doctor devoted a few more weeks to Lenin he might have discovered that a number of people had written rather fully on the political theory, and that Lenin had far closer first hand knowledge about the quotations than Chang! He might have also learned that the State and Revolution was never completed, as planned.
But his two years research authorizes Chang not only to note with interest but also to comment in passing upon the relative merits of Marxists. No work of Mehring’s is referred to in Chang’s book, but he did read a book of Ryazanov, and this leads our doctor to the scientific conclusion that Ryazanov ranks higher than Mehring. “It should be noticed in passing that Ryazauov as a historian of Marxist literature (sic!) ranks higher even than Frans Mehring.” We need only remark that Ryazanov ranked Mehring as the greatest historian of Marxism.
 
Literature and History
Chang not only has hazy notions as to what Marxist literature consists of, but he confounds literature with history, and is blissfully unaware that there is a distinction between dialectic materialism (the philosophy of Marxism) and historical materialism (Marxist sociology). He thinks that “historical materialism is also known as dialectic materialism.” In Pennsylvania, this passes for scholarship. But these are only the artificial pearls of his erudition, the genuine jewels are still ahead.
The learned Doctor has a preface and an introduction to his book. In the preface he informs us that in his book there is “little mention or use of Marxian economics”. But in the introduction he informs us that “it is presumptuous to draw a rigid line between economics and political science.” He is convinced of this, on the authority of professor J.H. Laski. On his own words, and upon his own authority, Chang pleads guilty of having been so presumptions as to draw a rigid line between Marxian economics and Marxian politics.
His lack of knowledge of Marxian economics does not, however, hinder him from speaking authoritatively about it. According to him “one of the productive forces is wage-labor.” He confounds productive forces with productive relations. Wage-labor is a productive relation. It is a bourgeois relation of production.
The Marxian concept of “class” is a closed book to Chang, but this does not prevent him from being very erudite in his chapter, The Class Domination Theory of the State. According to Chang the intellectuals are a class in society. It is perhaps safe to say that even Bedacht knows better.
When the classic quotations of Marxism run counter to Chang’s own conclusion, he amputates them, in order to make them, conform. Thus Chang is convinced that a necessary feature of Communist society is the disappearance of the division of labor. He reaches this conclusion by misinterpreting Marx’s statement to the effect that in a Communist society the subjection of labor dependent upon the present division of labor will disappear, and that there will be no opposition between brain and manual work. To Chang this means that the division of labor itself will disappear. (Marx’s own words are “when the slavish subordination of the individual to the yoke of the division of labor has disappeared, and when concomitantly the distinction between mental and physical work has ceased to exist ...”). Chang then bolsters his misinterpretation, by reporting that Engels agreed with him. Engels (according to Chang) held the view that the division of labor “lies at the basis of the division into classes”. (The point being that since classes will disappear so will the division of labor!). Here is what Engels actually wrote, “It is, therefore, the law of division of labor that lies at the basis of the division into classes.” Of course, the enslaving subordination of the individual under the division of labor as it exists in class society is one thing, and the division of labor itself is something else again. Among the outstanding characteristics of Communist society is that it frees the individual from subjection under particular types of the division of labor; but the Communist society itself has no intentions of doing away with division of labor. it is based upon international division of labor. And of course the law of the division of labor is one thing, and the division of labor is another. But Chang is law unto himself, and having confounded so many things, and understood so little, he confounds Marxism with himself.
 
A Typical Ph.D. Thesis
What has been said is sufficient evidence that Chang’s thesis is a typical Ph.D. performance on the American standard, pretentious, presumptuous, and second-hand. From the Marxist viewpoint it is worthless. We caution those who, seeking the easy way, would use this book as a source book of quotations. For one thing, Chang quotes Lenin through Stalin. But then what else could be expected, from one indebted to Bedacht, except to cite Stalin as “one who follows Lenin’s theory of the proletarian dictatorship very closely”? Is it astonishing that Chang therefore lists as minor extensions of Marxism, Lenin’s “theory of colonial revolutions and the theory of the unequal development of capitalism”. And that he also includes among Lenin’s contributions to Marxism “the theory of the possibility of the victory of socialism in one country.” For a summary of all these minor extensions, he refers the readers not to Lenin but to – Stalin. But the good doctor is not being funny, he is serious!
In all respects, his performance qualifies Chang not only for a doctorate but for a professorship in the present Marx-Lenin Institute, under the leadership of Stalin.
 







The article appearing below is a second contribution to the discussion on the problems of the German situation after the victory of Fascism. The views expressed are those of the writer. – Ed.





I.
The victory of Fascism in Germany is now an irrefutable fact. The defeat of the German proletariat means, of course, an indubitable set back to the revolutionary re-organization of society. To minimize the Fascist victory is to open wide the gateway to subsequent disasters. But there is no less danger in overestimating it. Fascism is victorious but its victory is not final. Its triumph was gained in Germany over a demoralized proletariat. It won because the workers were demoralized by the betrayal of the party of social democracy and the party of Stalinism in Germany. To draw erroneous political conclusions from this betrayal – to blame the workers – is to lead to further demoralization, despair and catastrophe on the international scale.
The “amazing thing” about the experience in Germany is that Hitler was able to come to power legally, i. e., that Hitler’s assumption of the state power did not provoke elemental resistance on the part of the workers. The worshippers of the elemental are aghast at this discrepancy between the dynamic background and the inertia of the proletarian mass. The proletariat of Germany, they sigh, is the “best organized working-class in the world” and yet despite its strength and organization, the Fascists literally slid into power without any resistance. Nothing approaching such passivity can be cited from past history. There are no analogies that seem to apply. The incentive to set them in motion seems to obtain, and yet the masses do not budge. Their lives are at stake and yet the workers remain docile, indifferent or stupefied. Learnedly, facts and figures are being culled to prove that the masses did act spontaneously in the past. Why, the same workers openly resisted the very same Fascists even before Hitler assumed power. Still more preplexing is the fact that even at the beginning of its historical journey the proletariat evinced unmistakable initiative. At their weakest, the workers tended “instinctively” to organize themselves, rising up spontaneously, throwing up their own leaders, and at times acting despite their leaders when the latter tried to stem their elemental urge. But now, almost on the brink of their historic goal, the workers seem paralyzed. Once Fascism assumes power, they permit it to crack their skulls and destroy their organizations. There are a number of revolutionists who are at present voicing privately their indignation, if not disgust with the workers of Germany and their “psychology”. The German workers, they say, are after all Germans and like all Germans they have been drilled and organized to the point of becoming automatons, ready to goose-step no matter who commands. It is a shameful fact that today in America there are Marxists who produce such psychology to account for the passivity of the German workers. In order to explain the situation in Germany, they find it unnecessary to dig into the tragic historical course of the working class in Germany; the role of their parties explains nothing; the treachery of social democracy and the supplementary treacherous policies of the official German Communist Party explain nothing. Psychology explains everything – “ the racial psychosis” fully accounts for everything, not only in Germany but in America also. Why are the American workers so inert? Are they not imbued with the psychology of rugged individualism and not the psychology of hay-foot, straw-foot? Answer – “They suffer from the racial American psychosis”. Our rugged individualists, if they happen to be American workers are also provincial and hence “terribly backward”. Clearly, the American workers – all workers – are to blame if they do not know how or why to fight; clearly, the workers and only the workers are to blame for failing to learn what their psychopathic leaders cannot teach them.
But according to our fetishists of the elemental, the American, just like the German worker is supposed to fight anyway, no matter what he knows and what he doesn’t. Why aren’t the American workers responding elementally like the American petty-bourgeoisie, the farmers, who are in open revolt? The farmers are seething, militantly they try to force their demands upon the state, they mobilize – and the workers ...? “They are still too backward,” replies our revolutionary thinker. Small wonder that with such Marxists abroad one finds the most sanguine perspectives of the conjuncture in the American revolutionary press. The big bourgeoisie is prepared for riot, for spontaneous mass outbursts; it has put all its state machinery in order to meet the gravest eventualities, even to the extent of preparing the Army to take over the railroads, if and when necessary. The ruling gang is alarmed by the lull below, fearful that the longer the masses remain dormant the sharper and more violent may prove the expulsion. [sic] But the revolutionists are busy manufacturing alibis, maintaining their prestige, and screening their own bewilderment.
Is the big bourgeoisie of America merely hysterical from an acute attack of “crisis psychosis”? Not quite. Though somewhat distended in panic, its eyes see clearly nevertheless. For one thing the big bourgeoisie sees danger on the part of the petty bourgeoisie which as a class responds the quickest and easiest to the elemental in accordance with its subordination to bourgeois ideology which is propagated and instilled in all individuals in society by the bourge-ois state, especially its propagandist agencies.
It is precisely because of this in capitalist society that we find in history “spontaneous and instinctive” mutinies of the workers. Whoever sees in the elemental uprisings of the workers organic, political acts – the beginnings or expressions of revolutionary class struggle – does not understand an iota of Marxism.
The proletariat, as a class fully class-conscious, as a class for itself, is historically the irresistible force for the overthrow of the bourgeoisie. In the class struggle between the big bourgeoisie and the proletariat, the hegemony of the bourgeoisie depends upon its maintaining the proletariat permanently in a demoralized condition, in the condition of a class in itself. To this end all the agencies of the bourgeois state are directed to permeate the workers with bourgeois ideology. And because of this, as Lenin pointed out, “the elemental development of the workers’ movement takes its course precisely in subordination to bourgeos ideology.” The less the workers are imbued with Socialist ideology the more readily do they respond elementally, to mutiny in despair or revenge.
(Continued in next issue)
 



(Continued from last issue)



The article appearing below is a second contribution to the discussion on the problems of the German situation after the victory of Fascism. The views expressed are those of the writer. – Ed.





That the proletariat is the only revolutionary class in modern society is due to the fact that the same forces that atomize all other classes tend to consolidate the workers, making them cohere more and more. It is the only class in society capable of revolutionary organization. But it cannot fulfill its historic mission without Socialist ideology. So long as the proletariat is not imbued with Socialist ideology it remains a class in itself, the workers cannot achieve class consciousness spontaneously or instinctively. To quote Lenin, “it can only be brought to them from without.” And again, “Since there cannot even be talk of the working masses developing their own ideology independently during the course of their movement – the question is to be posed only thus: bourgeois or Socialist ideology”. There is no third. Of course, this does not imply that the workers do not participate in the formation of Socialist ideology. But they participate not as workers but as theoreticians of Socialism, only to the extent to which they are able to master the scientific knowledge of their generation and are capable of advancing it. Lenin expressed his complete agreement with Kautsky in condemning as absolutely incorrect the opinion that “Socialist consciousness (i.e., class-consciousness) is the inevitable and direct result of the proletarian class struggle.” Socialism and the class struggle spring up side by side and not one from the other. They spring from different prerequisites. Of course, Socialism as a science is rooted in the same contemporary economic relations as the class struggle of the proletariat. But Socialist consciousness can arise only on the basis of profound scientific knowledge. And the vehicle of science is not the proletariat but the bourgeois intelligentsia. “Thus, Socialist consciousness is something that is brought from the outside (von Aussen Hineingetragenes) into the class struggle of the proletariat, and not something elemental (urwuechsig) that springs from it.”
It is by means of the party, and the party alone, that the proletariat can be organized politically and transformed into a class for itself; and it is by means of the revolutionary party that the proletariat is instilled with Socialist ideology. Thus the party opposes itself to the state. In relation to the proletariat, the class in itself, in capitalist society, the party is an objective force (von Ausseu Hineingetragenes) and not a subjective force (urwuechsig).
The task of the party, as Lenin posed it, lies precisely in diverting the workers’ movement from its elemental channels – from its urge to bourgeois ideology as a class in itself – and attracting under the wing of the party – imbuing it with Socialist ideology as a class for itself. Once a party has achieved this task, the fate of the proletariat becomes inextricably linked with the fate of the party which gains absolute control over the allegiance of the workers. This does not mean that the party having once achieved its task cannot degenerate and fail to fulfill its historic role and thus betray the proletariat. If the workers obey the party blindly, it is only because they have been blindfolded by treacherous leadership; it is only because the treachery of the leaders has not been exposed to them. To first blind the workers and then to accuse them of their blindness is to heap treachery upon treachery. The bulk of the workers in Germany have been attracted to the parties that claim to be the agencies of Socialist ideology. They have been trained to believe that the party of social democracy – originally a revolutionary party – truly continued to represent their class interests. Hence they obeyed it. The Communist party of Germany attracted another section but failed to gain over the social democratic workers because its own policies were at the core as treacherous as those of social democracy, and therefore could not counter-act or expose the perfidy of social democratic leaders. The workers attracted to the Communist party could not but obey the Stalinists. Outside of these two parties, there remained that section of the German proletariat that was still imbued with bourgeois ideology and those German workers therefore could not identify their own interests with either the socialists or the Stalinists. If they responded at all elementally it was only to gravitate into the camp of Fascism.
The German workers who were imbued with Socialist ideology could not and would not act without their parties. Only a petty bourgeois can pretend astonishment at such “subservience or servility”; only knaves or fools could presume that the workers should have broken on the instant with their traditions of decades and have acted on “their own”. The solidarity of the workers is no myth. They cohere so solidly, in fact, that nothing can prevent their being organized internationally as well as nationally – but on one condition, and one condition only, if an organization exists capable of directing them in their historic course. Alone they cannot and will not find the way. At all times and under all conditions in capitalist society a true revolutionary party is necessary.
No true revolutionary party existed in Germany. There, the leaders usurped the authority of the once revolutionary parties to corrupt the ideology and decapitate the working class. Not Hitler, but the Socialists and the Stalinists paralyzed the workers. By their silence or by their spoken order, the proletariat of Germany was mobilized not to oppose Fascism until the order to act would be given. The order never came, and now Marxists are “amazed” who do not know either what the proletariat is and what it is capable of, or what the party is and what the party may degenerate into. To repeat, the proletariat of Germany was defeated by Fascism because no true revolutionary party existed in Germany. The betrayal of its party reverted the proletariat back into a condition of a class in itself. As such it was helpless in the face of Fascism. Unless this lesson is learned once for all the disaster that threatens mankind will become a reality.
Whether or not Fascism will succeed in establishing itself in the majority of industrial countries is a life and death question for all these countries. An epoch of imperialist wars will inevitably follow the Fascist victory. In every country where the proletariat remains a class in itself, Fascism must win in conflict with the proletariat.
Leaving all other considerations aside for the moment, the proletariat of no nation can fulfill its historic mission, defeat Fascism and reorganize society, unless it is imbued with its international essence. In other words, the proletariat cannot become a class for itself unless the workers in each nation can think and act in international terms. The workers cannot so act – unless a true international party obtains. Regardless of all other forms of organization, if there be no such party, the, proletariat will remain politically unorganized, and either remain in or revert to the demoralized condition of a class in itself and therefore prove unable to wrest the power from the bourgeoisie no matter what its strength, no matter what the objective conjunction of events.
Fascism is the inevitable program of those who rule our destinies at present. To their program, and to the program of the Socialists as well as that of the Stalinists, i.e., the official Communist Party) must be counterposed the revolutionary scientific program – to win the decisive majority of the working class of America, sweeping along behind the true revolutionary party the broadest masses of the population in order to overthrow the bourgeois state within the national boundaries, and to lay the foundations for the socialist state as an integral part of the permanent revolution the goal of which is the establishment of a world-wide socialist society. The necessary and only means for achieving these aims is the International revolutionary mass party based upon the platform of the Communist International of Lenin and Trotsky.
This is the lesson of the German experience.
 







The article appearing below is a second contribution to the discussion on the problems of the German situation after the victory of Fascism. The views expressed are those of the writer. – Ed.





Part 1

Part 2
 



In the face of the monstrous odds, the workers of Cuba today must assume their historical task. They, and they, alone, can achieve the liberation of Cuba. Only the workers can set up an efficient form of government in Cuba, defeat the intervention of American imperialism, and solve the disastrous contradictions that have plunged and kept the Cuban masses in degradation. Successful American intervention will mean a disastrous defeat for the Cuban proletariat. The tragedy of the Cuban proletariat must be prevented!
The Cuban masses are militant. Seizures of plantations have already occurred. Embryonic revolutionary Soviets are in the process of formation. But unless the movement is led into the proper channels, the Soviets will become only a parody; American imperialism will restore its rapacious hegemony.
 
Revolutionary Party Needed
The Cuban workers cannot succeed unless a genuine revolutionary party is immediately formed, and takes the initiative; unless the international revolutionary proletariat, particularly of Latin America, the United States and Canada is mobilized in defense of the Cuban revolution. The criminal policies of Stalinism, the collapse of the Comintern have left the Cuban workers without their most necessary, essential and important weapons of struggle; they have no revolutionary party to lead them in battle; under the leadership of Stalin the international proletariat cannot come to their support. These weapons can and must be forged In Cuba, the Left Oppositionists must immediately call for the formation of a true Communist party. Internationally, the Left Opposition must inaugurate a united front in defense of the Cuban workers.
Time is precious now. Every day is equal to a decade. In the very heat of the struggle, the proletariat of Cuba can and must gain the time necessary to consolidate its ranks, and form its vanguard. Upon its success or failure rests the fate of Cuba. With clarity and boldness on the part of the vanguard a great victory can be gained.
At this juncture, it is suicidal to talk of the immediate seizure of power. In the period directly before us, a defensive battle must be waged. A serious decision to begin a systematic and regular struggle is developing in considerable masses of the workingmen. But first of all, it must exist in the ranks of the revolutionary vanguard. Lacking this condition it is impossible to proceed to a direct organization of Soviets. Insofar as this condition does not exist, the direct realization of Soviets must not be fostered. On the order of the day is not insurrection, but the slogan of REVOLUTIONARY NATIONAL DEFENSE! Self-determination for Cuba! Down with the Platt Amendment!
 
Defeat American Intervention
Before there can even be talk of passing to the offensive, the Cuban workers must ward off and defeat the immediate threat of American intervention.
Only the Cuban workers can prevent the formation of another puppet regime, a replica of the Machado dictatorship, this time with Fascist trappings.
The vanguard must lead in demanding the immediate convocation of the Constituent Assembly. The masses must be mobilize under the banner of transitional demands. At the same time, with these democratic slogans (Free speech! Free press! Freedom of assembly!, etc.) must be widely agitated the slogan of nationalization (banks and industries – particularly sugar and tobacco plantations).
But first and foremost, the vanguard must organize the united front against American imperialism; and in this united front must be included not only all workers’ organizations but any and all sections of the petty bourgeoisie that are willing and ready to struggle against the common enemy.
Only in this way can the tragedy of the Cuban proletariat be averted.
 



In proposing the slogan for nationalization, comrade Weber seeks to forestall any objections to it “in principle”.
In his opinion slogans are largely a matter of expediency; and he argues that “the decision as to the correctness or incorrectness of a slogan rests to a large extent (our emphasis) on our judgment of the ripeness or unripeness, not of the advanced workers but of the mass of workers to rally around and fight for a given slogan.” Such an approach to slogans is one-sided, formalistic, and, in our opinion, fundamentally erroneous.
For the justification of any slogan Marxism demands the analysis of the economic reality, of the political foreground, and of the political meaning of the slogan. As an example let us take a slogan such as “revolutionary national defense”. We cannot for a moment maintain that our acceptance of, or objection to this slogan involves no question of principle but is largely a matter of expediency – of our ability to judge whether the masses will rally and fight for this slogan. No matter how backward the workers may be, no matter in what numbers they may rally, we are opposed in principle to the slogan of “national defense” whenever the economic and political conjunctures are such that this slogan can have no political content other than that of social-chauvinism. When the war is an imperialist war to raise this slogan is to betray our principles. To raise this slogan in a colonial or semi-colonial country (India, China) when it is fighting to cast off the yoke of imperialism, is entirely in keeping with our principles.
Moreover, it is not enough to only ask whether under the given economic and political conditions, a slogan may acquire an opportunistic political content, we must also make sure that it excludes an adventuristic political content.
 
Political Content of Slogans
Comrade Weber admits that the slogan of nationalization, if divorced from the slogan of workers’ control, could have only a reformist (opportunistic) political content. But no proof is presented that the slogan of workers’ control would not be adventuristic at this time. Its adventuristic content is excluded on the grounds that the masses will rally around the slogan of nationalization. To a large extent we cannot be motivated by such considerations. Let us allow that the masses, in all their backwardness, do rally around the slogan of nationalization – what then? Unless we can tie up in reality this slogan with the slogan of workers’ control, what will be the political content of the slogan of nationalization? The answer to this question supplies the key to our acceptance or rejection of this slogan.
From our analysis of the present economic and political conditions, we maintain that the slogan of nationalization cannot be advanced at present with a principled political content. The question of workers’ control raises directly the question of the agency whereby such a slogan can be concretized. The fight for control over industry is the special historic task of factory committees. Lacking this historic agency, the slogan of workers’ control is meaningless.
We must not confuse factory committees with labor unions. Factory committees cannot be substituted for labor unions. But there is a connection between the two. To speak of factory committees, as a general slogan, when the hulk of the workers are not even organized into unions is to leap over an historical stage, from reality into a vacuum. This does not mean that we do not propose shop committees in industrial unions of advanced worker’s ready to take this step, even now. But we must remember that on the road of the development of a class toward class-consciousness, the labor unions are a gigantic step forward. The bulk of the American workers has yet to take this step; the bulk of the American proletariat is as yet not unionized, particularly in the decisive basic industries. This means in the language of politics that the slogan of workers’ control can only be posed on paper. This means that in reality the slogan of nationalization can acquire only the political content of reformism – “government ownership.”
 
The Isolation of the Vanguard
In this connection – touching the economic and political organization and the advancement of the proletariat – we cannot discount as inconsequential or secondary the condition of the vanguard itself. Comrade Weber proposes to disregard the fact that the vanguard is isolated as yet from the backward masses, and that even the Left wing (including here the reformists) constitutes an insignificant minority. Comrade Weber fails not only to distinguish sharply enough between “the party” and “the class” but also to stress the essential function of the party. An isolated vanguard cannot instill any slogan with its true political content. It is only the power of organization of the Communists that enables the advance guard to be the leader of the whole class. The unorganized masses themselves can neither leap ahead nor advance, no matter how much sound advice they receive from the sidelines.
True, we are faced with illimitable opportunities and perspectives, but we must guard against befuddling ourselves by seeking for short cuts. Before we can pose the slogan of nationalization plus workers’ control, we must root ourselves in the unions; the decisive section of the proletariat must be unionized, and not a small minority as at present. We must first establish factory committees not merely as “shop (grievance) committees” but as an integral part of the elementary mass organizations of the proletariat. When comrade Trotsky proposed the slogan of nationalization for England, he did not overlook the fact that the bulk of the English workers was strongly unionized, that factory committees were a reality and not a wish-fulfillment.
 
Workers Unorganized
The workers of America are not only backward, they are still unorganized. This is a fact. The elemental urge toward organization is manifest. But exaggerate the influx into A.F. of L. unions to the utmost – and the tact remains that the great bulk is outside of even the reactionary unions (to say nothing of the unemployed). The workers must be organized, and this stage can be achieved and passed very rapidly, provided we ourselves can take the necessary leap ahead in this direction. Not only must we go into unions already formed and forming but we must initiate unions where none exist. The trade union theses of the 2nd C.I. Congress chart the course that is immediately ahead. In the period immediately before us, our slogan must be INTO THE MASSES!
But won’t we lose valuable time thereby? Won’t that restrict our work solely to union activities, etc., etc.? Isn’t that syndicalism, etc., etc.? Of course not!
In his anxiety to endow the economic struggle with a political content of the widest possible scope, in his fervor to advance the masses politically, comrade Weber overlooks also the fact that under present conditions, every and any strike acquires immediately a political significance, and if it attains a wide enough sweep, it becomes of primary political consequence, preparing the masses for much wider activity.
“The economic struggle of the proletariat becomes a political struggle during an epoch of the decline of capitalism much quicker than during an epoch of its peaceful development”. Precisely because of this, we can in a comparatively short time achieve advances beyond our most sanguine expectations. Only, we cannot skip over the necessary historical stages.
 
Transitional Slogans
The initial steps must be taken. Elementary mass organizations are required. And in the economic struggle now unfolding under the NRA, we must participate actively, using our transitional slogans – The right to organize! The right of assembly ! The right to strike! The right to picket!, etc.
Only in this manner can the decisive sections of the proletariat he mobilized. And the import of this mobilization must not be overlooked, nor the role that we must play in it. Once the workers have been mobilized, once the base for factory committees have been established, then the slogan of nationalization and workers’ control will be on the order of the day.
We agree with comrade Weber that “Life (i.e., reality – J.G.W.) alone is the final arbiter in the matter of choice of tactics”. But we disagree with him as to the conclusions that must be drawn from the analysis of reality. At the present stage we are opposed to the slogan of nationalization on principle. This slogan is divorced from reality. Hence it is adventuristic, and if advanced must inevitably acquire an opportunistic political content.
What must be done at present is to clarify through discussion among the most advanced’ workers the whole question of nationalization, workers’ control, factory committees – and what it directly involves, i.e. Workers’ Councils.
 



This article is the last one written by John G. Wright. It was accompanied by the following memo to the editor: “Joe, here is something for your ‘reserve.’ There will be two more (Marx’s critique of Feuerbach and Engels on Feuerbach). Usick.” Although the article was planned ‘as only the first of a trilogy—a trilogy that was never finished—we feel that our readers will agree that it stands in its own right as a stimulating contribution in the defense of Marxist theory and as an indication of what the socialist movement lost through the untimely death of Comrade Wright.
Ludwig Andreas Feuerbach, the fourth son of a famous German lawyer, was born at the beginning of the nineteenth century, July 28, 1804. His family was bourgeois. A native of Southern Germany, fiery and passionate by temperament, a born fighter, his natural element was the hurly-burly of public life; he needed the widest possible contact with people, the broadest possible arena. This was denied him by German reaction. The authorities drove him from his university post in 1832, refused to reinstate him in 1836, barred him from the main centers of German intellectual life and kept him penned up, in virtual exile, in a provincial corner of Bavaria, until his death September 13, 1872.
Many know Feuerbach by name; not a few have read about him, mainly in Marxist literature, but nowadays hardly anybody reads his books. His writings are not readily obtainable either in translation or the original German. Yet in the history of human thought he occupies an eminent place. For a whole decade, from 1840 to 1849, he dominated the field of advanced philosophy as only Hegel did before him and Marx and Engels after him.
Among the revolutionary-minded generation of his day, Feuerbach, the materialist philosopher and avowed opponent of theology, was naturally a hero. And just as naturally he was hated and hounded by reaction, not in Germany alone. In England, for example, one pillar of the church, William Maccall, publicly called for the physical annihilation of Feuerbach. “Aye, annihilate; for this is not a matter in which we pretend to one morsel of tolerance,” announced this British reactionary. It is the fate of thinkers like Feuerbach to be maligned and misrepresented long after their death. All the more incumbent is it upon us to restore his true stature and to place his teachings and accomplishments as well as his limitations and failures in their true historical context.
Feuerbach started out as a Hegelian. To be sure, he never was a wholly orthodox Hegelian, any more than were Marx and Engels who likewise started out as Hegelians. But Feuerbach was nonetheless an idealist at the outset.
His evolution is the conversion of a Hegelian into a materialist. The course of the development of Marx and Engels passes from Hegel through Feuerbach to dialectical materialism. Rosa Luxemburg somewhere says that dialectical materialism, the world outlook of Marxism, was the child of bourgeois philosophy, a child that cost the mother her life. At this birth Feuerbach may be said to have officiated as the midwife.
At the age of twenty and, ironically enough, a young theologian, Feuerbach came to Berlin to study under Hegel. After two years, he studied natural sciences at Erlangen. Philosophy became his lifework. His first book, published anonymously in 1830, Thoughts on Death and Immortality, shows that years before his definitive break with Hegel, he had already come under the influence of Spinoza, whose doctrine is materialist in its essence, despite its idealist modes of expression, as Feuerbach himself was later brilliantly to demonstrate.
In 1839 when Feuerbach published his Zur Kritik der Hegelschen Philosophie (A Contribution to the Critique of Hegelian Philosophy) he had broken with idealism. By 1841 when his monumental book The Essence of Christianity appeared, he was a materialist who waged war against idealism as the last refuge of theology and against Hegelianism as the last rational prop of theology.
Karl Marx hailed Feuerbach’s ideas at the time as world-historic in their importance and inaugurating a new epoch. Why? Because they represented a decisive break with idealism and a rallying to materialism. As early as the eighteenth century, particularly in France, Marx pointed out in The Holy Family, materialism stood for the struggle not only against all metaphysical systems, against religion and theology, but also against the existing political institutions. To put it differently, materialist ideas were revolutionary.
If the credit for driving religion out of its last refuge in history belongs to Marxism, then the credit for launching the final struggle to drive theology out of philosophy belongs to Feuerbach. In this he was indisputably the first, although he did not thoroughly purge his own thought of idealist remnants.
There was nothing cut and dried about Feuerbach. With an eloquence rare in philosophic writings and with the zeal of a fighter for a correct line in philosophy—an intransigence and eloquence which captured the minds and hearts of revolutionists of his day Feuerbach demonstrated that nothing exists save nature and mankind; that nature does not owe its existence to any power outside of itself, least of all to the power of an infinite subject, as idealists put it, or that nature is the “self-estrangement” and “other being” of the Spirit, as Hegel put it. Such claims, Feuerbach explained, are mere translations into philosophic language of the theological doctrine that God created the world.
“Our philosophers,” he wrote, “have up to now been nothing else but mediatizing theologians.” As for Hegel, “the ‘Absolute Spirit’ is the ‘departed Spirit’ of theology which wanders like a ghost in and out of Hegelian philosophy.” This “Absolute Spirit” remains as mysterious and unknowable as the God of the theologians, and Hegel actually tells as little about his “Absolute” as theologians are able to tell about their divinity. Whoever fails to break with Hegelianism simply refuses to break with theology, concluded Feuerbach.
German idealism had forged powerful weapons; Feuerbach turned these weapons against idealism itself. “Truth is concrete,” was the banner raised by German idealism, in the first instance by Hegel. “Philosophy is cognizance of whatever is,” agreed Feuerbach. “The supreme law and task of philosophy is to think about essence, about creatures and things as they really are.” He then proceeded to show how idealism violated its own fundamental premise.
Anticipating the conquests of natural science, the German philosopher Kant had introduced the doctrine of evolution into philosophy; Hegel was later to extend evolution into history. But evolution is unthinkable outside of time and space. And so Kant recognized time and space as forms of cognizance, that is, as indispensable premises for human reason.
With this Feuerbach agreed, only immediately to add that time and space must be much more than that. Are not time and space the necessary forms of existence, as well as the necessary forms of intuition and knowledge, the indispensable premises for the existence of all creatures and things? he asked. Of course they are. Space and time, said Feuerbach, can be forms of cognizance only because I myself happen to be part of whatever exists, only because I myself am a creature living in time and space.
“Space and time,” he wrote, “are the necessary forms of existence of all essence, of all creatures and things ... A timeless sensation, a timeless will, a timeless thought, a timeless essence — are absurd fictions. Whatever is located outside of time, has by this token no temporal existence and cannot strive either to will think.”
According to Feuerbach, being could not possibly mean an existence in thought alone. Such a contention is meaningless. “To prove that something exists means to prove that it exists not only in the mind,” he insisted. It must exist in the outside world.
The starting point of idealism is that mind is prior to matter. Feuerbach concentrated his heaviest fire against this.
What divides the opposing schools of human thought is precisely their starting points. Arrayed here against each other in the field of theory, just as in politics and in economic life, stand hostile social forces, class forces representing progress on the one side, retrogression on the opposing side.
This historic controversy rages as fiercely today as it did in Feuerbach’s day. Take the current crisis in science. Many modern scientists, physicists in particular, find themselves floundering, hopelessly divided over such issues as:

Is there a real outer world which exists independently of our acts of knowing?
 
Is the real outer world knowable or unknowable?
 
Is there objective lawfulness, objective causality, in nature?

These are the very same questions, it will be noted, which we are now discussing in connection with Feuerbach and to which he, as a materialist, gave affirmative answers.
Scientists today are divided into two warring camps. On the one side, a group who answers these questions in the affirmative; and on the opposing side, those who deny it.
Such denials follow consistently from the idealist standpoint that mind is prior to matter. And on this central issue Feuerbach in his day took the offensive.
Whoever maintains that mind is prior to matter is simply a theologian in disguise who seeks to deduce the objective world from some immaterial power, or the idea. To try, said Feuerbach, to deduce the objective world from one’s idea is to show that one understands exactly nothing about nature or about the mind. The idealistic starting point is a false one.
“Das Sein geht dem Denken voran.” Being comes before thinking. Thinking does not determine being; just the contrary, it is being that determines thinking. Idealists reason like those who upon seeing crowds of people walking on a sunny day, conclude that the sun shines because people are out promenading. The correct conclusion is that people are out because the sun is shining. “I do not generate the object from the thought,” said Feuerbach, “but the thought from the object.”
“I differ,” he wrote with justifiable scorn, “toto coelo from those philosophers who pluck out their eyes in order that they may see better; for my thought I require the senses, especially sight.”
The idealist doctrine of the “I,” i.e., that the abstract “subject” is the sole source of reality, is merely another way of saying that mind is prior to matter. It is a false doctrine, argued Feuerbach. He reasoned approximately as follows:
I am able to see, but I am not the only one gifted with sight. I am also seen by others. The real “I” is invariably that “I” which stands opposed to the “You.” The real “I” in turn becomes the “You” that is to say, becomes the object for another “I.” For itself the “I” is naturally the subject; for others it is, just as naturally, the object. Therefore “I” constitutes simultaneously both a subject and an object, or subject-object. This is not an identity, but a unity. Whoever analyzes consciousness independently of the rest of mankind does so only by ripping apart every single tie between consciousness and the outer world.
In Capital (page 61, Kerr edition) Marx develops and deepens the same ideas as follows:
“Since he [man] comes into the world neither with a looking glass in his hand, nor as a Fichtean philosopher to whom ‘I am I’ is sufficient, man first sees and recognizes himself in other men. Peter only establishes his own identity as a man by comparing himself with Paul as a being of like kind. And thereby Paul, just as he stands in his Pauline personality, becomes to Peter the type of genus homo.”
The outer world, said Feuerbach, is the necessary premise for consciousness. Our “I” is not at all the abstract entity with which idealist philosophers try to operate. “I” am a real being, a thing of the flesh. If you talk about my essence, please bear in mind that my body, too, belongs to this essence. What is more, it is my body, taken as a whole, that precisely constitutes my essence. It is my body that constitutes my “I.” The process of thinking does not take place within some abstract being; it takes place exactly within my body, within your body. Before you or I can think we must exist. “Before perceiving we breathe; we cannot exist without air, food and drink.” Das Sein geht dem Denken voran. Being is prior to thinking. Matter is prior to thought. Being determines consciousness, and not the other way around.
Feuerbach’s motto was: “Do not think as a thinker, but think as a real, living being in which capacity you are now swimming in the waters of the world ocean.” It is an excellent motto which Marxism has rendered more exact by specifying that individuals do not exist except within specific productive relations in society, i.e., as members of historically developed classes.
Opponents of materialism argue that consciousness cannot, after all, be explained by material phenomena. Thought is immaterial, spiritual, whereas material phenomena are just that—material and unspiritual. This argument (annihilating in the eyes of idealists) completely misses the mark; it does not even touch the materialist foundations of Feuerbach’s doctrine. It is idealism that tries to do just the reverse; namely, to explain material phenomena by mental phenomena; in fact, to establish an identity between the two. It is wrong to do so, reasoned Feuerbach.
The domain of subjective events stands contraposed to the domain of objective events and these opposing sides can be understood only as a unity. Not an identity, but a unity. “What is for me or subjectively, a purely spiritual, immaterial and unsensuous act, is by itself, objectively, a material, sensuous act,” explained Feuerbach. The task is to differentiate between them in order then not to sever them asunder, nor falsely to identify them, but to relate them correctly as two sides of one and the same unified whole.
He carefully differentiated not only between consciousness and material phenomena but also between things as they really exist and things as they appear to us, things as we understand them. He differentiated in order to relate them correctly. Through our senses we obtain mental images of the objective world. These images are likewise products of nature but they are distinct from the actual objects of mental representation. In philosophic language, the thing-in-itself is distinct from the thing-for-us. The second, that is, the mental image, is only a reaction to the first, that is, it is an image of objective reality, just as man himself is only a fragment of the world of nature which is mirrored in his mind.
“My taste-nerve,” explained Feuerbach, “is just as much a product of nature as salt is; but from this it does not at all follow that the taste of salt as such would immediately be an objective property of salt; it by no means follows that the salt such as it appears only as an object of sensation would exactly be that in and-for-itself; that the sensation of salt on the tongue would also be the property of salt, as we think of it without sensation.”
Sensation or sense perception is the result of the objective action upon our sense organs of a thing in-itself which exists independently of us. Such is the materialist theory of Feuerbach; such is the theory of Marxism as well. Sensation is the subjective image of an objective world, a world which is simultaneously in-and-for-itself.
Idealists make quite a to-do about the theory of knowledge, gnosiology or epistemology as academicians call it. Is the thing-in-itself, that is, the outer world, really knowable? If so how do we know it? How can we prove it? Many modern scientists profess to be nonplussed by these questions.
In doing so they unwittingly follow in the footsteps of theologians who try to reduce logic to a mere instrument of proof. Actually, 1ogic, even formal logic, is much more than that. It is one of the methods of proceeding from the known to the unknown, as was demonstrated by Bacon, the founder of modern materialism, with his method of induction as far back as the beginning of the seventeenth century.
The argument that it is not possible to prove by “a priori arguments” that things are knowable has little weight in the progress of human knowledge, as all the advances of modern industry and technology have shown. It is a scholastic argument. The whole point is that the capacity of man to know reality can be, and has been, proved by other means. This problem of “knowability,” declared unsolvable by Kant, was, as a matter of record, resolved by Hegel who pointed out that as we learn more and more about the qualities of a thing, we get to know more and more about it. In other words, knowledge is derived from observation, from experience, from industry, technology, science, in brief, from the practical activity of man. As Marx pointed out, the problem of “knowability” is not a theoretical question at all, but a practical one. And any scientist who, when he philosophizes, turns his back on such proof demonstrates thereby that his “reason” is no better than the more or less diluted, more or less rarified “reason” of the theologians.
We get to know things as we learn about their qualities, Feuerbach agreed with Hegel.
It is well worth pausing here to consider briefly how Feuerbach used Hegel’s own arguments (against Kant) to demonstrate the inner inconsistency of the Hegelian system. Whatever lacks of qualities, said Feuerbach, “has no effect upon me, has no existence for me... To deny all the qualities of a being is tantamount to denying the being itself.” But this is precisely what Hegel does with regard to the category of “pure being” with which his system starts.
“Pure being,” as Hegel defines it in his Science of Logic, is “without difference and without any characteristics.” It is “pure indeterminateness,” it is “totally empty,” otherwise, Hegel insists, “its purity would be violated.”
“Pure being” is therefore without any real being, concluded Feuerbach. There is no being other than determinate being. What exists in space and time are particular species and individuals, solar bodies, stars, animals, plants, rocks and so forth. “Space and time,” said Feuerbach, “are not simple forms of phenomena but essential conditions of existence.” Hegel’s “pure being” lies outside of time and space; it is without any characteristics; it is indeed, as Hegel himself put it, an “empty abstraction.” It is a typical theological abstraction. Under the guise of “pure being” Hegel simply smuggles in his “Absolute Spirit.” Thus there is no evolutionary process in Hegel’s logic at all; in reality, his reasoning is circular. He starts with the Absolute and ends with the self-same Absolute.
Feuerbach demonstrated without difficulty that other key categories of Hegel are likewise infinite and absolute in character, as for example the categories of Wesen (or Essence) and of Begriff (usually translated as Notion, this category figures in Hegel’s system now as Spirit and now as Self-Consciousness). Because of this inner inconsistency Feuerbach discarded the dialectic altogether. He mistook the idealist form of the dialectic for the dialectic generally, a blunder which Marxism alone was able to rectify. In addition, by considering “man” not as an abstraction transcending society but as a concrete expression of given societies, themselves in evolution, Marx and Engels transcended the idealist vestiges in Feuerbach’s philosophy.
This brings us to the question of objective causality in nature. As Lenin pointed out, this question is of special importance in determining the philosophic line of any given system of ideas. Feuerbach expounded his views with exceptional clarity in his answer to a critic, Rudolf Haym. It is a rather lengthy quotation, but one well worth studying. Feuerbach wrote:
“For Feuerbach ‘nature and human reason,’ says Haym, ‘differ completely, and between them there opens an abyss which it is impossible to span either from one side or from the other.’ Haym grounds this reproach on paragraph 48 of my Essence of Religion, where it is stated that nature may be understood only through nature itself; that nature’s necessity is neither human nor logical neither metaphysical nor mathematical; that nature alone is that, kind of being to which it is impossible to apply any human measure. Although we do compare natural events with similar human events, although we apply to nature human expressions and concepts such as ‘order,’ ‘purpose,’ ‘law,’ and are compelled to apply such expressions to nature because of our language, we do so only to make nature comprehensible to us.
“What does this mean? Do I mean to say by this that in nature there is no order, to say, for example, that after fall summer may follow, after spring, winter, after winter, fall? Or that there is no purpose in nature, to say that between the lungs and air, for example, or between light and the eye, between sound and the ear there is no concordance? Or that there is no regularity in nature, to say, for example, that the earth may move now in an ellipse, now in a circle, and move around the sun, at one period in a year, at another — in a quarter of an hour? What an absurdity! What then did I intend to convey in this passage? Nothing more than to draw a distinction between that which belongs to nature and that which belongs to man.
“In this passage I do not say that there is nothing in nature which actually corresponds to our words and representations concerning order, purpose and law; all that is denied in this passage is the identity between thought and being; it is denied that order and so forth allegedly exist in nature exactly as they do in the head or sensations of man. Order, purpose, law are no more than words by means of which man translates nature’s doings into his language, so that he may understand them; these words are not devoid of sense or objective content, but it is nonetheless necessary to differentiate the original from the translation. In the human sense, order, purpose, law express something arbitrary. From the contingency of order, purpose and law in nature, theism directly infers their arbitrary origin; it infers the existence of a being, different from nature, a being which brings order, purpose and law into nature, nature which is itself chaotic and without any determination. The ‘reason’ of theists ... is a reason which stands in contradiction to nature and is absolutely devoid of an understanding of the essence of nature. The reason of theists splits nature into two beings—the one, material; the other—formal or spiritual.” (Quoted by Lenin in Materialism and Empirio-Criticism, pages 124–25)
Feuerbach thus recognized objective causality in nature which is mirrored only with approximate accuracy by the human representations of order, law and so forth. Human representations of nature are relative, but on the basis of these relative representations mankind gains knowledge of the objective lawfulness in nature. This recognition of objective causality is with Feuerbach inseparably connected with the recognition of the objective existence of the outer world of objects, bodies and things which human consciousness mirrors. His views on this question, as Lenin pointed out, are thus consistently materialist.
Frederick Engels wrote:
“One must himself have experienced the liberating effect of this book (Feuerbach’s Essence of Christianity) to get an idea of it. Enthusiasm was general; we all became at once Feuerbachians.”
What liberated the young Marx and the young Engels? What made them so enthusiastic? They knew, as was said long ago, that without revolutionary theory there cannot be revolutionary practice. Marx and Engels were at the time trying to draw revolutionary conclusions from the Hegelian system and found themselves floundering in the self-contradiction of idealism. Feuerbach, as Engels put it, “pulverized this contradiction at one blow” and enthroned materialism again in philosophy. This paved the way, as we shall see in our next article, for the elaboration of a correct line in sociology, in politics and economics. It enabled our great teachers to go beyond Feuerbach and to elaborate the scientific doctrine for socialism.
Today, when the fate of mankind sways in the balance, it is clearer than ever before that salvation for the workers lies only in revolutionary practice, in the struggle for socialism. For this, revolutionary theory is indispensable as the guide for action.
This struggle proceeds on three fronts—the economic, political and theoretical. Not three separate arenas, walled off from one another, but three interrelated fronts of one and the same struggle. The correct line is of supreme importance in all three. In the main, Feuerbach laid down the correct line in philosophy. Therein lies his historic achievement. Therein, too, lies our indebtedness to him.
 



SEPTEMBER 1954 marked the first anniversary of a farm crisis that was formally admitted by the Malenkov regime on September 3, 1953. At that time Khruschev, the first Secretary of the Russian party, publicly acknowledged in his report that the “level of agricultural production as a whole” was “inadequate”; that there was a “lag in a number of important branches of agriculture” with the worst shortages existing “in animal husbandry, the growing of feed and fodder crops, potatoes and vegetables”; and, finally, that this lag in agriculture was already so serious as to act as a brake upon industrial growth, in particular, said Khruschev, it “retards the further development of the light and food industries.”
These and other admissions came as a stunning surprise to the Soviet people. In the entire post-war period the Kremlin had claimed nothing but successes, admitting only minor “shortcomings” .in agriculture. This, in fact, was the keynote of Malenkov’s report to the 19th party Congress in October 1952. Malenkov then boasted: “Our agriculture is becoming more and more perfected, more productive and is turning out more and more produce for the market.” The chronic problem of assuring grain to the country had been forever solved. “The grain problem,” announced Malenkov, “formerly considered the most acute and gravest problem, has thus been solved successfully, solved once and for all. (Tumultuous, prolonged applause.)”
When it no longer became possible to deny the farm crisis, the Malenkov regime took the road of trying to explain it away as simply a “crisis of growth.” Khruschev in his report continued flatly to deny that there was any shortage of grain. “Generally speaking,” he said, “we meet the country’s grain requirements in the sense that our country is provided with grain, that we have the necessary state reserves and export definite quantities of grain.” There was, he explained, a shift in the demand of the Soviet population “more and more from bread to meat and milk products, vegetables, fruit, etc.,” owing to “the rise in the material well-being of the working people.” The campaign for “abundance” was the cover chosen by the Kremlin in its struggle to overcome the farm crisis.
There followed a whole series of agricultural reforms coupled, as usual, with administrative measures. The regime made sweeping concessions to the individualist tendencies in agriculture. Private ownership of cattle and cultivation of individually-owned strips of land were spurred; taxes on crops were reduced and so were delivery quotas, benefiting primarily the rich peasants and rich collective farms; overdue taxes were remitted and prices raised on state deliveries and state purchases of crops; bonuses for “over-fulfillment” of crop quotas were raised, etc.
Among the more important administrative measures were the following:

The structure of the government-owned Machine and Tractor Stations was overhauled. The MTS personnel was made permanent and separated completely from the collective farm personnel, with each MTS member provided by law with a private landstrip, privately owned cow, plus grants of long-term loans to build privately owned dwellings.
More than 100,000 specialists, agronomists, zoo technicians, engineers, etc., were sent into the countryside, with one or more being attached to each collective farm and each MTS. Many of these specialists have taken over the post of chairman of the collective farm.

No official statistics have been issued in this connection, but from all indications in the Soviet press, the administrations of the overwhelming majority of 94,000 collective farms and almost 9,000 MTS have been changed from top to bottom, many of them several limes since September 1953.
 
Sweeping Changes
An equally drastic change has been carried out in the structure of the party apparatus in the rural areas, with the local and district secretariats transferred to the MTS as their center of operations, and with only a skeletal structure retained of the former local and district bodies.
It is no exaggeration to say that since the early Thirties, when Stalin launched wholesale collectivization, the Soviet countrywide has not witnessed such sweeping changes, such shifts of administrative personnel and other “innovations” as have taken place in the recent period.
Literally armies of Soviet bureaucrats armed with “plenipotentiary” powers are now swarming over the countryside. Among the recent emergency measures it is instructive to note that tens of thousands of “organizers” were ordered sent into the fields during this year’s harvest season, with a team of “organizers for every 3-5 combines in order to assure the uninterrupted and highly productive operation of the combines.” (Decision of the Party Plenum, June 24, 1954.)
Developments, entirely unforeseen, aggravated the Soviet farm crisis. The ink had hardly dried on the emergency decrees that emanated from the September 1953 Plenum when the Soviet countryside was hit by early and severe frosts and blizzards. The very measures of “material interestedness” by which the Kremlin had hoped to overcome existing shortages, boomeranged against the regime. The mass of the peasants neglected the collective-farm crops in order to save their own midget economies from, the unexpected blows of early winter, the severest in recent years. The full extent of the losses incurred last year remains unknown.
But the columns of the Russian press did report heavy losses of cattle, sheep and horses, feed and fodder crops. Even the grain crop was admittedly affected. The 1953 grain harvest was apparently the poorest in post-war years, at all events, by official admission, it fell below the 1952 levels.
In this new situation, the Kremlin made another abrupt shift. The slogan of “abundance within the next two-three years” was modified to read “a sufficiency and then an abundance.” And more significantly, the Kremlin for the first time admitted that the production of grain was “inadequate” for the country’s needs. By July of this year the official press was citing six basic reasons why Soviet grain production had to be sharply, increased “in the course of 1954 and 1955.”
First, there is the need “to increase the annual per capita consumption of flour and grain products”; second, to “improve” cattle feeding; third, to create “sufficient” seed and insurance reserves; fourth, to provide enough grain for industrial purposes; fifth, to raise the state reserves; and sixth, to raise the grain exports (Pravda, July 2, 1954). Thus, the grain problem, which Malenkov had boasted less than two years before had been forever solved, has emerged once again as the primary and most acute problem confronting the regime.
 
Emergency Program
Less than six months after the promulgation of the September 1953 agricultural reforms and new program, the Malenkov regime was compelled to promulgate an entirely different program designed to overcome the lag in grain production. This emergency program was adopted at the February-March 1954 Plenum. It called for the cultivation of grain on the semi-arid steppes of Kazakhstan, the Urals and Western Siberia, with some 32 million acres to be cleared and cultivated in 1954 and 1955.
As late as January of this year there was no talk in the press of such a vast project. The most that was originally contemplated was the possible opening up of one, perhaps two million acres of this “virgin land” for agricultural production, and this, over a period of several years.
Only sometime in February was the decision suddenly made to plunge headlong into this vast venture. The Plenum which formally adopted this new emergency plan was held only a few weeks before the actual opening of the spring sowing season.
Let us further recall that the areas for this projected huge-scale grain production have lagged notoriously, having for years produced the lowest yields in the Soviet Union. In his September 1953 report Khruschev singled out “the Volga area, West Siberia and Kazakhstan” as “lagging” and poorest in “yields of grain and especially grain-leguminous crops.”
These same areas have likewise been among the least efficient in the utilization, maintenance and repair of agricultural machinery and in the operation of their Machine and Tractor Stations. The June 1954 Plenum has once again singled out for criticism “many MTS and state farms” of Kazakhstan, the Urals and Western Siberia for their “failures and short comings” in the 1954 sowing season.
Meanwhile the operations have proceeded on a scale hitherto unknown even in the Soviet Union. Into the “virgin lands” a whole army of technicians, mechanics, tractor and combine drivers, primarily members of the Russian Communist Youth, has been sent. The June 1954 Plenum boasted that “more than 140,000 individuals have already arrived in the MTS and the state farms and are actively involved in the work” on the virgin lands. This is evidently only the first installment of a projected large-scale migration. The lead editorial of July 2 Pravda makes this quite clear.
“As the scale of operations in acquiring the virgin and fallow lands expands, it will demand,” says Pravda, “a new influx of working forces into the Eastern regions from other cities and industrial centers... It is necessary to bear in mind that the population of these regions will grow rapidly in numbers in the next few years.”
It is noteworthy that Pravda foresees not only a rapid growth of these regions but underscores the source of this growth, namely, “other cities and industrial centers.” This means that administrative pressure will be exerted to an increasing extent to force workers from factories to migrate into the West Siberian countryside, the Urals and Kazakhstan.
On July 1 the Chelyabinsk tractor factory “initiated” a move that was given nationwide publicity.
“The factory,” reported Pravda, “sent into the villages more than a thousand production workers... The workers who remained behind in the production departments undertook the obligation to fulfill the plan (of production) for themselves and for the comrades who departed to the collective farms.”
Ostensibly this movement of production workers into the countryside is “voluntary” and temporary, only for the period of the 1954 harvest season. But from many indications the regime envisages a more permanent shift of at least a part of the existing labor force.
 
“Only a Beginning”
The June 1954 Plenum suddenly announced that the plan adopted in March to bring under grain cultivation 32 million acres of virgin lands was “only a beginning.” Far more extensive areas are to be opened up and cultivated.
The Plenum ordered the Ministry of Agriculture, the Ministry of State Farms and the Council of Ministers of the Russian Federated Republic and that of Kazakhstan to submit new plans by October 15, 1954. Without waiting for the submission of these new plans Pravda on July 2, 1954 declared that the area of virgin lands to be placed under cultivation “in the next few years can be increased twofold and threefold.” In other words, the March 1954 plan for cultivating “only” 32 million acres in 1954-55 was scrapped within ninety days in favor of a plan to cultivate from 75 million to 100 million acres “in the next few years.”
Under the original March 1954 plan, it was necessary to divert the bulk of new agricultural machinery to the virgin lands. Some of this machinery proved inadequate to the needs and new types were found necessary. Under the new and far bigger plan the Soviet agricultural machine industry will have to be reorganized to produce primarily for the projected stupendous operations, to the obvious detriment of the rest of Soviet agriculture.
The labor shortage which already admittedly exists on Soviet farms will not be ameliorated but aggravated in the next period by the need to divert greater labor forces into the Asian steppes and former mountain pastures. Again, the rest of the Soviet agriculture will not be aided but hampered thereby. Why then has the Kremlin finally decided upon this course? Obviously for one reason and one reason only. The Malenkov regime sees no other way out of the current farm crisis.
There is a tell-tale clause in the June 1954 Plenum decision that highlights the bankruptcy of the Kremlin’s entire agricultural policy. It is this, that the projected expansion of Soviet agriculture must take place “chiefly by way of organizing new state farms.” (Pravda, June 27, 1954. Our emphasis.)
The June 1954 Plenum boasts that in the course of the spring months alone there have been created 124 new state farms averaging in size over 51,000 acres each. These are giant grain factories. And the current plan obviously aims to increase their number tenfold and more, with the view toward making the state-owned and state-operated sector the dominant one in Soviet agriculture. State ownership and state operation turns out to be the only way out of the blind alley created by more than a quarter of a century of Stalinist “collectivization.” To put it in different words, the Malenkov regime, unable to cope with the opposition and resistance of the Soviet peasantry, incapable of supplying the village with enough manufactured goods and necessities to spur the peasants to produce more for the market voluntarily, has plunged into another bureaucratic adventure in agriculture.
 
High Risk
It is an adventure because Soviet agriculture still depends overwhelmingly for its production on the work and skill of the mass of the peasantry. The existing state farms, some 4,700 in number, account for only a small fraction of the total agricultural production. Their yields have run as a rule lower than those of collective farms and their operations have been far more costly. In October 1952 Malenkov admitted that “one of the major shortcomings in the work of a large number of state farms is the high production cost of grain, meat, milk and other produce.” In September 1953 Khruschev repeated: “The high cost of producing grain, meat, milk and other items still constitutes a big shortcoming in the work of the state farms,” and he added: “Many state farms are headed by inadequately trained workers.” A large percentage of the existing state farms have operated only thanks to state subsidies.
Under the most favorable circumstances, a major expansion of state farm operations in these conditions, could not be considered other than a calculated risk. The bureaucratic adventure into which the Malenkov bureaucracy has plunged is nothing short of a desperate gamble. The lands they have brought and propose to bring under cultivation are marginal lands; that is, it is a gamble whether good crops can be grown there under favorable climatic conditions. Inclement weather, periods of drought could prove insuperable obstacles.
As if to warn the bureaucratic adventurers, on the heels of early winter there came this year a belated spring over virtually the whole Soviet Union. The June 1954 Plenum listed ten major provinces that failed to fulfill the plan for spring sowing of grain, plus two Republics (Estonia and Latvia), and seven more major provinces that failed to fulfill the plan for potato sowing. The opening up of the first virginal lands took place under admittedly unexpected and unfavorable conditions. But all this did not deter the bureaucracy, it made it only the more determined to take the plunge.
The year 1954, when both the sowing campaign and the harvesting took place under the sign of emergency, was originally intended by the Kremlin to mark the breaking point in the farm crisis. The bureaucracy has been disappointed in its expectations. None of the previously existing major shortages has been alleviated. And in contrast to 1953, the grain problem has once again emerged to the forefront.
 
Impose New Strains
The new plan, which on paper appears to solve everything, has imposed new and tremendous strains on both the Soviet countryside and Soviet industry.
The June 1954 Plenum adopted special measures, as yet not made public, “to strengthen labor discipline” on the farms and “to assure the active participation of all collective farmers in the social production of the collectives.” The peasants find it more profitable to work on their own midget enterprises and no amount of administrative pressure will substantially alter their attitude. But the collision between the bureaucracy and the peasants will be intensified.
The Soviet workers find themselves also under mounting pressures. In 1953 they were called upon to produce more “within the same productive areas and with the same equipment”; the June 1954 Plenum has summoned them to “aid” the collectives and the state farms “without detriment to the work of the state enterprises and constructions.” As in the case of the Chelyabinsk tractor plant, this means that an increasing number of workers will be drafted for work in the countryside, temporarily or permanently, while the remaining workers are speeded up to fulfill the quotas “for themselves and for the departed comrades.”
The second year of the still unresolved Soviet farm crisis will therefore unfold under much greater social tensions and conflict than the year that has just elapsed.


 The case of Milovan Djilas, Tito’s personal friend, formerly one of the top figures in Belgrade and once the acknowledged leading theoretician of the Yugoslav party, has attracted worldwide attention and comment. In a series of articles written from Oct. 11, 1953, to Jan. 7, 1954, for Borba, central newspaper of the Yugoslav party, and for the January issue of the magazine New Thought (Nova Misao), Djilas raised a whole number of theoretical and political issues. However, these pale into the background when compared with the theoretical and political issues posed by Tito himself at the emergency plenary sessions of the Yugoslav party’s Central Committee which was convened on Jan. 16-17, 1954, to take up solely the Djilas case.
Djilas’ views have received considerable notice. But Tito’s views in this same connection merit by far the greater attention; and, moreover, they place Djilas’ conceptions in correct focus. For this reason we think it fitting to discuss the Djilas case by starting with the official position as laid down by Tito.
At the January plenum of the Central Committee Tito presented two main—and mutually exclusive—propositions in the Djilas affair. In the first place, he said, it was simply a case of a single individual. Djilas’ actions and opinions, said Tito, were Djilas’ “own product — they represent, his own opinions.” Secondly, the actions and opinions of this single individual, unless counteracted, would have the most disastrous consequences; they would lead to nothing less than the liquidation of the Yugoslav regime, within a single year, and without any internal struggle.
Tito was quite emphatic on this point. Here is how strongly he put it:
“For if we were to permit this [that is, the propagation of Djilas’ views], within one year our socialist reality would not exist—it would not exist, I tell you,—and this, without even a bloody struggle.”
The official resolution adopted by the plenum of the Yugoslav Central Committee treated the same theme. It charged Djilas with having “confused public opinion and seriously harmed not only the League of Communists but also the interests of the country.”
The resolution further stated that by his activities Djilas
“provided a political basis for the splitting up of the ideological and organizational unity of the League of Communists, and for its liquidation.”
These formulations are obviously much milder than Tito’s own words, but the implications are identical.   
New “Socialist Reality”? Before dealing with Djilas’ views, however important they may be, it is obviously in place to take up this far more important question, raised by Tito and the emergency plenum—the question of how the views of a single individual, shared allegedly by no other’ prominent Yugoslav leader, could possibly lead to such far-reaching historical results as the speedy and bloodless overthrow of the Yugoslav “socialist reality.”
From the Marxist standpoint such a proposition is an absurdity. Even the shakiest of social regimes cannot be overthrown by the “opinions” and “conceptions” of isolated individuals, let alone those of a single person. Such overturns require the intervention of social forces, of classes. Tito and his colleagues, including Djilas, have for years maintained that a new “socialist reality” exists in Yugoslavia. If this has any meaning at all, it means that new social institutions, resting upon new productive relations, have come into, existence in Yugoslavia — and not at all a mere new selection of individuals on the basis of commonly held opinions or conceptions. Such new institutions and productive relations cannot be destroyed otherwise than by force; “conceptions” alone are here quite powerless. This is what Marxism has always taught. Belgrade now affirms the opposite.
The resolution of the emergency plenum makes only a perfunctory attempt to explain the source from which Djilas’ views derive their miraculous destructive powers. This explanation consists of a brief reference to “comrade Djilas’ functions in the League of Communists,” The Kremlin theoreticians have always distinguished themselves by their individualistic fetishism with regard to leadership. It is from, the leaders: above all the Leader-in-Chief, that all successes and blessings flow—that is the credo and cult of Stalinism. It was left for the Titoites to go the Stalinists one better, locating miraculous powers not merely in “leaders” but, if you please, in the “functions” of given offices! This is not Marxism, but a caricature of a caricature.
Tito personally made a more serious attempt at an explanation. He ascribed the vast injurious power of Djilas’ conceptions to the following three factors: (1) the prevailing moods in the country; (2) the instability of a certain section of the Yugoslav party; (3) the general conditions which prevail “during the phase of the peaceful revolutionary evolution.”
Tito affirmed that “there still are incredibly large remnants of all possible conceptions” in Yugoslavia. Now “remnants,” even “incredibly large” ones, in the minds of people cannot represent a serious danger to an existing “socialist reality.” These “remnants” may fume and rage all they please, but they are powerless to do anything. Psychological mood—and even more so, “remnants” of these moods—weigh but as a feather against the power of social institutions and productive relations.
“Socialist reality” has advanced so far in Yugoslavia that it is possible to discuss not only the “withering away of the state” but also the withering away of the party as a long-range process, according to Tito—who added, by the way, that he was “the first to speak about the withering away of the party” in this long-range sense.
If “remnants” of psychological moods are dangerous, it can only be because alien class forces are raising their heads in Yugoslavia. But this can only mean that Yugoslav “socialist reality” is not a reality at all, but a delusion, if not a deliberate deception.
Elsewhere in his speech Tito describes the process as a sequence of
“incredibly harmful consequences [that] started to unfold like a ball of melting snow lolling down the roof.”
In other words, Tito uses the term “remnants” as a euphemistic expression for something that is just the opposite of “remnant”—namely, the new surge of boldness and confidence among the counterrevolutionary forces, still powerful inside the country. He admitted as much when he said that
“within a very short lapse of time ... reaction and all the wavering and unhealthy elements at home started to raise their head, to say nothing of reaction in the West ...”
Counterrevolution at home, aided and abetted by imperialism abroad—that is the real danger. But Tito preferred to skirt around it, to minimize it.   
Situation in the Party So much for the real situation in Yugoslavia as disclosed by the Djilas case. Let us now pass to the situation inside the Yugoslav party. Tito expressed complete confidence in the “enormous majority” of the party membership, but simultaneously warned sharply, not about a tiny minority, but about
“thousands upon thousands who would strengthen the ranks of the waverers and of various kinds of adventurers, and who could do immense harm.”
This is an astonishing admission. It is far more ominous than anything charged by Djilas. According to Tito, in the ranks of the victorious and ruling, party there today exist “thousands upon thousands” of potential, if not actual, recruits for the counterrevolution. As of March of this year, the total party membership was officially given as 700,030. (Vice President Rankovich gives the number of party members dropped or expelled by the end of 1953 as 70,604, or roughly one tenth of the total membership.)
This admission is far graver than any of the charges levelled against Djilas. It is indeed a dangerous situation. If anybody bears responsibility for such a danger, it is the Yugoslav leadership. Yet neither Tito nor the rest of the plenum proposed to do anything about it.
Worse yet. Tito tried to explain it away as a normal state of affairs consequent upon any and every victorious workers’ revolution. Here we come to Tito’s “general” and “objective” explanation of the situation. The gist of his explanation is this:
“During the phase of the peaceful revolutionary evolution, that is to say, when the situation becomes very difficult, and especially when things do not go along easily and as fast as some have reasoned and imagined they can go, then the weaklings slowly begin to raise hands, to throw the spear in the bush, or to seek to go faster, without asking whether it is possible to go faster at all. They look for all sorts of excuses, for all sorts of petty theories and philosophies, to condemn the slow development of the social regeneration. This is, concretely, the ease of comrade Djilas.”
The foregoing, on the face it, is nothing else than a description of moods prevailing among a certain section of the Yugoslav party. These moods have extended directly into the top leadership. But as Tito himself previously acknowledged, what is involved is by no means merely the isolated case of a Djilas. The description is true not alone of Djilas but of “thousands upon thousands” of other party members. It is also true of important layers of the Yugoslav population, including perhaps even layers of workers. Djilas’ articles could not and did not create this situation. Djilas and his articles were simply a by-product of the critical domestic situation. The Titoite treatment of the Djilas case was intended to muffle this crisis rather than deal with it directly.
At the March 1954, session of the Yugoslav central Committee, Vice President Rankovich, formerly head of the secret police, repeatedly attacked Djilas for causing “enormous harm to our country.” But at the same time Rankovich disclosed that long before the articles of Djilas there had occurred “serious appearances of political disorientation in some of the organizations of the Communist League.”
Ironically enough Rankovich did not blame Djilas for this “political disorientation.” He said that it had come as a result of “confusion” stemming from the policies adopted at the Sixth Congress of the Yugoslav CP in November 1972.
It was at this Congress that the Yugoslav party was converted into a “League” and fused with the so-called “Socialist Alliance.” It was at this Congress that the theory of the withering away of the state and of the withering away of the party was promulgated. This brings us to the heart of Djilas’ conceptions.   
“Withering Away” of State and Party There is nothing complicated about them. They are the current ideas of the Tito regime drawn to their logical conclusion. The starting point of Djilas, as of Titoist thought generally, is the “socialist reality” now allegedly existing in Yugoslavia. This reality is unceasingly, even if slowly, evolving and changing, creating entirely new conditions, throwing up entirely new social forces, en route to the “withering away of the state.”
All these absurdities and mockeries of Marxism flow not from anything in Yugoslav reality but from the blind Titoite adherence to Stalin’s infamous theory of “building socialism in one country.” One can read in Pravda this same sort of tripe about the Soviet “socialist reality” creating entirely new conditions, throwing up entirely new social forces (a “new” Soviet “intelligentsia,” etc.) — plus the constant admonitions of the danger of “remnants” of bourgeois moods. All this is allegedly taking place en route to ... communism. But there is one difference. The Stalinists place stress on the “strengthening” of the state, because of the “capitalist encirclement.” The Titoites emphasize the alleged “withering away” of their state, because of their alleged successes in building “new democratic socialist relations” in Yugoslavia. Both proceed on the basis of the same falsification of reality (that “socialism exists”—whether in the USSR or in Yugoslavia). The Titoites simply put a minus sign over the state where the Stalinists put a heavy plus sign.
Djilas simply dotted all the “i’s’” and crossed all the “t’s” in Tito’s version of Stalin’s theory of socialism in one country. Djilas announced that since the withering away of the state was an immediate requirement, it therefore followed that the party must likewise immediately “wither away”, otherwise the party could degenerate into a bureaucracy of the Stalinist type. Lenin’s type of party was needed only for the revolution; after that, it must degenerate into Stalinism. In other words, this profound thinker locates the source of Stalinist degeneration in the most progressive feature of Bolshevism, its creation of the democratic-centralist party. This discovery has been made by every renegade from Marxism—and long before Djilas.
In his verbose, muddled articles, Djilas stated his central thesis with relative clarity as follows:
“We must learn to respect the opinions of others though they may appear to be foolish and conservative. We must also accustom ourselves to be in a minority even if we are right, without thinking that because of that socialism and the revolutionary achievements are doomed.
“The question arises whether the interests of a party, or a group or leaders, must always be identical with the people, with society—and when do they enter in conflict? During the revolution [in Russia and in Yugoslavia—G.V.] these interests in the main coincided. This is not so today. Today no party or group, not even the class itself, can be the exclusive expression of the objective needs of the whole society; it cannot assume the exclusive right to ‘manage’ the movement of the productive forces without stiffening and enslaving them, including the most important part of them, the men ...
“The demand of the time, particularly under socialism, is to weaken the monopoly of political movements on the life of society. There is no road but the road of more democracy, freer discussions, freer elections, more adherence to the law.” (Djilas, General and Particular, Borba, Dec. 20, 1953.)
It is noteworthy that Djilas, the latter-day champion of “democracy” as a force that rises above history and above the classes, preaches it only “in general.” Nowhere does he demand “more democracy,” “freer discussions” or the “struggle of ideas” inside the Yugoslav party, which is run not on the Leninist principle of freest discussion and greatest democracy but along the Stalinist lines of “monolithism.” Djilas demands “democracy” and the “struggle of ideas” only “in general.” Never for the workers, never for the party. So far as the party is particularly concerned, his chief demand is not for its Leninist democratization, but for its liquidation, as an “outdated” instrument. His adversaries, from, Tito down, have likewise remained silent on this score.
As we already know, it is Tito’s claim that Djilas’ views were Djilas’ “own product—they represent his own opinions.” From the foregoing this is clearly incorrect. In the same speech Tito admitted as much. Djilas, it turns out, did consult Tito. As Tito recalled:
“On one occasion during the autumn, he (Djilas) asked me: ‘How do you Stari (Old Man) look upon my writings and what do you think of my articles?’ I replied: ‘To tell you the truth, there are certain things with which I do not agree, but mainly there are things which are good, and I believe that, as regards these other aspects, there is no reason why you should not write, so go on writing.’ I told him this because the articles also contained views which we ourselves express in our own speeches and writings.” (Our emphasis.)   
Djilas’ Views No Secret There is no mistaking the meaning of these words. Djilas’ views coincided in the main with Tito’s “own speeches and writings,” In fact, toward the end of December, when most of Djilas’ articles, had already been written, he was elected President of the new Yugoslav Federal Assembly, only to be removed a few days later from this post as well as from all other high party and government posts held by him.
Moreover, Djilas’ views, which apparently go beyond even what he has put down in writing, were never a secret to the inner ruling circles. As Tito himself said:
“Comrade Djilas has always had every opportunity to say whatever he wanted within our circle, and to say even more than he has written. We all knew him and we all discussed things together with him. And we were also making jokes, and one can say all kinds of things when one is joking.” (Our emphasis.)
The meaning of these words is likewise plain enough. Djilas’ political views, which led to his downfall, could not possibly have come as a surprise to Tito and the rest of the ruling tops, of whom Djilas has been a part for the last 17 years, and among whom he evidently has said “whatever he wanted” and “even more than he has written.” In the course of these uninhibited inner-circle discussions, was Djilas ever called to order, or was he on the contrary encouraged? Tito does not say. He tries instead to wave the whole matter aside as if nothing more than intimacy and joking were involved.
Things came to a head when Djilas started to spell out in public his conviction that a Stalinist-type bureaucracy was in process of formation in Yugoslavia. He stated this quite openly in his 10,000-word article, Anatomy of Morals, which appeared in the January issue of the magazine New Thought.
Tito himself did not decide until some time late in December that comrade Djilas has gone too far. He then “asked that the articles be stopped immediately.” Apparently Djilas went over Tito’s head. He had his last article published “hurriedly” in the magazine. (This incidentally, could not have done without the agreement of Veljko Vlahovich, editor of both Borba and New Thought, who since Dec. 20, 1953, published 13 of Djilas’ articles in the course of 17 days and paid him 220,000 dinars—about $7,500. After recanting publicly, Vlahovich was permitted to get off scot-free, and was later elected Chairman of the Committee on Education in the new Federal Council.)
Djilas’ political position is a shameless capitulation to reformism. It is nothing more than a rehash of the ideas of Bernstein and Co. These renegades from Marxism applied their revisionism to what they called the “democratic reality” of imperialism; Djilas has applied it to the alleged ‘socialist reality ’ of Yugoslavia. The Tito regime did not have the courage to denounce Djilas’ revisionism as such, because they are cuddled too close to the Social Democrats and do not wish to offend them; and also, because such a characterization would strike too closely home, inasmuch as Djilas’ line is precisely the line of the Yugoslav Sixth Congress drawn to its ultimate conclusion. So the official resolution of the Central Committee contented itself with declaring Djilas’ line to be “basically contrary to the political line adopted at the Sixth Congress.”
In April of this year, Djilas formally dropped his membership in the Yugoslav CP. But this does not constitute the termination of the Djilas case, which is basically a phase of the entire unfolding crisis of the Tito regime and party.
In June 1953, celebrating the fifth anniversary of the Yugoslav-Cominform split, Edward Kardelj, Djilas’ rival as party theoretician and first Vice President of Yugoslavia, boasted that the Titoite cadre
“remained united all that time, and have succeeded in the midst of cruelest struggle to build new democratic socialist relations.”
By the end of 1953 this boasted “unity,” was proved an illusion. The Djilas case represents only the first breach, for the Titoite ranks are corroded by revisionism. In the unfolding crisis of the Tito regime, its adaptation to imperialism, most crassly expressed in Yugoslav foreign policy, is a central factor. But it is not the only factor. Highly important is the refusal of the Titoite leadership to break with the ideology of Stalinism, in particular with the Stalinist lie of building socialism in one country and with the Stalinist conception of the party.
All this will act to aggravate the crisis of the Tito regime and party, which has been so clearly revealed in the Djilas case. And that is the real meaning of this celebrated affair.



Technics and Civilization
By Lewis Mumford
Illustrated. 498 pp. New York. Harcourt, Brace and Co. $4.50.
The book is nicely written, well bound, printed on fine paper and illustrated with excellent photographs. But the material it surveys is ossified with age.
The process for turning out a stale interpretation of history is as follows: to each ten pounds of Sombart add ten ounces of Veblen. Obtain all the available volumes on the history of inventions and development of technology. Rip off the covers and draw out the contents. Next obtain an anthropologist (dead or alive) and extract from his gullet the terms eo, paleo, and neo. Add technics. Mash to a pulp using meat chopper or axe and feed into a barrel. Gently sprinkle with holy water to exorcise Marx. By now the barrel with its contents is ready to be set into violent motion. Do so by invoking the spirits to serve as prime movers. Revolve at the rate of 1001 revolutions per minute, and serve in a bound volume.
Those who have never heard tell of spirits spinning a barrel should refer to Mumford according to whom the spirits are the prime movers not only of society but of life itself. Mumford believes in “internal teleology”. In his own words, “even the most rigorous scientific description of the physical basis of life indicates it to be internally teleological”. If the spirits are able to move so much, why shouldn’t internal teleology be capable of spinning a mere barrel?
Mumford extracts the major precepts of Sombart and Veblen so haphazardly that he may very well have used an axe. Sombart attempted to amplify Marx by proclaiming that “all history of society revolves around two sorts of contradictions, like around two poles: I call them the social and national contradictions”. Mumford emerges from Sombart with right angle instead of two poles: “the national struggle cut at right angles to the class struggle”. After cutting the class struggle at right angles, Mumford proceeds to cleave at to pieces. “After 1850 nationalism became the drill master of the restless proletariat, and the latter worked out its sense of inferiority and defeat by identification with the all-powerful State.” One could not have done worse using a meat chopper.
Mumford’s acceptance and admiration of Veblen is incompatible with his own emphatic rejection of the “Victorian myth of a struggle of existence in a blind and meaningless universe”. If anyone ever subscribed to this myth, it was Veblen. He viewed social evolution from what he termed “the standpoint of modern science, essentially Darwinist”. He defined Darwinism as follows: “A scheme of thought, a scheme of blindly cumulative causation in which there is no trend, no final term, no consummation.” What is this if not Mumford’s “Victorian myth of a struggle of existence in a blind and meaningless universe”? Mumford muddles by rejecting the myth and accepting Veblen.
To add to the muddle, Mumford’s Victorian Myth is itself a myth. The Victorians did not at all subscribe to the viewpoint Mumford ascribes to them. If anyone is entitled to serve as a representative of Victorian thought it is Herbert Spencer, and he did not at all view the universe as being blind and meaningless. To him evolution was chockful of meaning and progress, and capitalism was an ideal of nature.
One more instance will suffice of the jumble that Mumford concocts out of his ingredients. Following Sombart and Veblen, Mumford announces that Marx’s description of “price and value remains as pre-scientific as Ricardo’s”. Marx was just another victim of the misleading verbalisms of paleotechnic ideology. Mumford does not venture to expose Marx’s fallacies, but he does clarify the paleotechnic notions on the subject: “This was the notion that economic value had a relation to the quantity of brute work done and the scarcity of the product.” Mumford is unaware that this notion has nothing in common with the Marxian theory of value. Instead he provides his own scientific description of value, his own neotechnic verbalisms: “Real values do not derive from either rarity or crude manpower ... Genuine value lies in the power to sustain or enrich life ... The value lies directly in life-function: not in its origin, its rarity, or in the work done by human agents.” To sustain these contentions, Mumford makes the following scientific discoveries: “a glass bead may be more valuable than a diamond, a deal table more valuable aesthetically [!] than the most tortuously carved one, and the juice of a lemon may be more valuable on a long ocean voyage than a hundred pounds of meat without it”. With one squirt of lemon juice Mumford overthrows the whole science of economics and the entire structure of Marxism. Small wonder that he is a basic Communist, which Communism he emphasizes (in italics) is necessarily post-Marxian. Mumfordian Communism is neotechnic. Its slogans: Increase Conversion! Economize Production! Normalize Consumption! Socialize Creation! Small wonder that Mumford’s work has been acclaimed so widely. Mumford’s ideas are basically those of the apologists for capitalism. To Mumford the life-giving “values” of lemon juice are the same thing as the exchange value of lemon juice. He makes mish-mash of both. He exclaims, “it is not rarity that gives air its power to sustain life”. How profoundly true! Air is not rare. Air sustains life. Therefore Marx was a victim of paleotechnic verbalisms; he knew that values in use did not underlie values in exchange. According to Mumford a whiff of air would be more valuable than a ton of lemons to a man coming up for the third time in mid-ocean.
Years ago Karl Marx pointed out that no comprehensive history of the development of technology had been compiled as yet. A book with real, genuine and so forth value on technology and civilization still remains to be written.
J.G.W.



NEGROES in the United States in 1930 numbered about
11,900,000. About 80% live in 16 southern states and the District of
Columbia.
Historically the Negro was rural and agricultural. He was primarily
a cultivator of cotton. Since the center of the cotton area is in the
South, the Negro population was from the very beginning concentrated
there. In this sense it is still correct to speak of the Negro as
primarily “southern”. In approaching the Negro problem these historical
aspects have been stressed more than sufficiently, but the profound
changes that have taken place among the Negroes during the last few
decades have been neglected almost completely.
Originally, the history of the Negro in America was the history of
cotton. But today, it is an anachronism to view the Negro as primarily
a backward farmer confined to cotton areas. In this sense it is no
longer correct to speak of the Negro as primarily “southern”. The
history of the Negro has become directly linked with modern industry.
He has been separated from the soil and suddenly placed in the midst of
the complex modern industrial structure. This is a fact. And,
obviously, it is necessary to establish this fact because a tendency
still prevails to view the Negro, especially the southern Negro, in
terms of those conditions that prevailed at the outbreak of the Civil
War, and in the period immediately following. The Negro, especially the
southern Negro, is no longer overwhelmingly agricultural.
In 1860 the Negroes were most densely concentrated in the South,
particularly within the boundaries of six cotton-growing states,
Mississippi, Georgia, Alabama, South Carolina, Louisiana and Arkansas.
Naturally enough these states then could serve as a focus in any
consideration of the Negro problem. In 1860 what was true of the
Negroes in these states applied largely to the Negroes of the entire
South, who comprised more than 92% of the total Negro population, and
who were overwhelmingly agricultural. But to take these six states as
our point of departure today can lead only to most grievous errors. The
profound economic changes that the South underwent following the Civil
War met with the greatest inertia precisely in these states. To this
day they have remained predominantly agricultural with cotton still the
main crop. (They produced 63% of the cotton crop in 1930.) Only within
this area have the Negroes remained largely rural and agricultural.
The Negro population has been becoming urbanized (i.e.
proletarianized) at an ever increasing tempo. For three decades
following the Civil War, for the US as a whole, it remained rural and
agricultural (in 1890, it was 80.6% rural and only 19.4% urban); in the
three decades following, and particularly in the last decade the trend
has been toward towns and cities. In 1920 the shift was to 66% rural
and 34%; urban; in 1930 the shift was much more accentuated, 56.3%
rural, 43.7% urban. The shift was by no means restricted solely to the
North. In 1930 the number of Negroes living in southern cities exceeded
those in northern cities. Concurrently, while the Negro population was
growing in other states (southern as well as northern), the Negro
population in this Old South area remained stationary over a
period of decades. The Negro population of these six states was in 1910

– 5,087,000; in 1920 – 5,079,000; in 1930 – 5,073,000. During the same
period the Negro population in the US had increased more than 20%. This
clearly denotes an intense migration from these agricultural states
into industrial sections. However, it should not be concluded that
deep-going changes have not been occurring within the Old South itself.
Here too, the industrial development has been making gigantic strides
forward, breaking down the old economic structure, and the original
economic differentiation between the industrial North and the
agricultural South. The development has been uneven, but the same
process has been going on here as elsewhere, only at a different rate.
The historical cultural and economic conditions of the Old South tended
to retard the process. What has most tended to obscure its actual
course is the fact that even today more than 42% of the total Negro
population still lives within the boundaries of these six states. In
1910 the same area held 51.7% of the total Negro population.
More than two-thirds of the total Negro farmers in the South and
almost three-fourths of the tenant farmers are to be found in these
same six states. A study limited to this area must necessarily fail to
reflect the fundamental changes in Negro life.
From the density of the Negro population within this area,
conclusions have been drawn that are highly fallacious, particularly
the conclusions that the Negro problem is primarily geographic, i.e.,
southern, and agricultural, and therefore a “national” problem. Flowing
from this, the attempt is made to reduce the entire problem to the
analysis of only this particular section of the South, the famous
“Black Belt” sector. For the core of this sector stretches precisely
over the states we have been discussing. Just as it is possible to draw
any kind of a triangle within a circle, so it is possible to construct
within this territory a particular “well defined area” in which the
Negroes would compose the majority of the population. But just as what
applies to the inscribed triangle need not apply to the circle, just so
what applies to this particular sector need not apply at all elsewhere.
Such a sector may be, and in this case it actually is, arbitrary and
artificial. In the first place the “Black Belt” embraces a territory
that has remained primarily rural and overwhelmingly agricultural;
secondly, even according to the most sanguine estimates it includes
only about 3,000,000 Negroes, or approximately one-fourth of the total
Negro population. Even the Stalinists claim for it only “some 3,320,000
Negroes”. The “Black Belt” is a very arbitrary sort of a belt. The six
states over which the core of it extends comprise about 500 counties,
with a population of 8 million whites and 5 million Negroes, that is,
61.5% white. To obtain a “solid area” in which the Negroes form the
majority of the population, it is necessary to select particular
counties which must be contiguous. Some 200 counties can be squeezed
into this requirement. The most imposing picture of the “Black Belt” is
painted by the Stalinists. Yet even they claim for it only that, “In
192 counties they made up from 50% to 75% of the population; in 36
counties they comprise more than 75% of the population” (Labor
Fact Book, p.78. Figures based on 1920 census).
Leaving aside for the moment all other considerations it is obvious
that one cannot equate even the actual area over which the bulk of the
Negroes is spread – some 24 states including the District of Columbia –
with a handpicked area of 192 counties, in which the whites compose an
insignificant minority only in 36. Moreover such a belt, to be
consistent, must exclude the remaining 300 counties in which there are only
about 2 million Negroes. It also throws out of focus not only the
millions of northern Negroes, but also a greater southern population
than the one actually included, some 3,300,000 Negroes in the directly
adjoining states of Texas, North Carolina, Tennessee, Virginia, and
Florida, in which there are 11,460,000 whites. Needless to say, the
constructors of “Black Belts” do not and cannot remain consistent with
their own premises. They include perforce within it counties that
explode the premises of Negro majority, of contiguity and of “well
marked area”. No two maps drawn of the “future” Negro State tally. The
most appalling and ambitious ones include practically the entire South.
The least pretentious would include the cities of Richmond, Memphis,
Vicksburg, New Orleans and Savannah, which with the exception of
Savannah are predominantly white.
By focussing our attention on the “Black Belt” we cannot understand
the significance of the decisive economic and social shifts in the
South in general and among the Negroes in particular. By thinking in
terms of the “Black Belt” we can only think of the Negro problem in
terms of conditions that prevailed in the middle of the 19th century.
The basic factors in the Negro problem are not geographic divisions, or
state boundaries, or county lines. The basic factors are economic. The
so-called “Black Belt” was and still remains predominantly rural and
agricultural. In the meantime, the economic development has been
surging over the old state and new county lines. Under the impact of
economic forces the mass of the Negro population in and outside of the
six states has been rapidly shifting from rural to urban, from
agriculture to industry. This shift, which has been going on at an ever
increasing rate, must continue to take place in accordance with the
internal logic of American capitalist development. This process, which
has already vitally affected the “Black Belt” itself, although it has
not yet disintegrated it, must proceed at an ever increasing tempo.
The. agricultural aspect of the Negro problem, particularly in this
phase of it, provides the subject for an independent analysis. Suffice
it to say that the entire agricultural base of the South as a whole is
being disintegrated not only by the permanent crisis of American
agriculture, and the industrialization of the South, but also by the
mechanization of cotton farming. All these factors bear most directly
and immediately upon the Negro farmer who is being driven from the land
into urban centers and into the ranks either of the proletariat or the
unemployed. In the period immediately before us we shall witness
accelerated changes in the “Black Belt” proper, precisely along the
lines indicated by what has already happened elsewhere in the South.
The Negro farmer is being driven from the land.
This movement has already penetrated deeply into the heart of the
“Black Belt” itself. We
have already pointed out its stationary or declining population and
also the fact that more than two-thirds of the Negro farms in the South
and almost three-fourths of the tenant farmers are in the “Black Belt”
area. What holds true of the entire South bears most directly upon the
Negro farmers in these six states. In the entire South, in 1920, there
were about 980,000 Negro farmers of whom 714,000 or about three-fourths
were tenants; in 1930 the Negro farmers dropped to 880,000 of whom
699,000 were tenants or more than three-fourths. At the same time, only
46.6% of the white farmers in the South were tenants. The pressure to
which the agricultural Negro is being subjected is brought out still
more clearly by comparing the trend among Negro farmers with that among
white southern farmers. Between 1920 and 1930 the number of white
farmers dropped also, but only 1.6% as compared with more than 7% for
the Negroes. While the Negro tenants decreased absolutely, the number
of white tenant farmers increased. At the same time the number of white
share croppers almost approached that of the Negro croppers: white,
383,381; Negro, 392,897. The white farmer is being pauperized at a
different rate from the Negro. But the pauperization of the white
farmer accelerates the rate at which the Negro is being driven from the
land. And in point of fact this has already crystallized itself
definitely: the economic base of the Negro has already shifted from
agriculture to industry. The crux of the Negro problem is in modern
industry and
not in the old agricultural South.
The movement of the Negroes to the North has been nothing but an
integral part of the urbanization of the Negro. The movement northward
began at the same time as the urban shift in the South. The growth of
Negro population in the North from 9.4% in 1890 to 20.2% in 1930 is
only an integral part of the shift to cities and towns of the Negro
population as a whole from 19.4% of the total in 1890 to 43.7% in 1930.
The sweep of this shift is apparent at a glance, if we examine some
figures.
In 1930 there were more adult Negroes in towns and cities
than remained on land. According to the last census, adult urban
Negroes – in the entire U. S. between 20 and 44 years of age – numbered
2,820,000; those who remained on the land numbered 2,197,000. [1]
Over 3,800,000 or almost two-thirds of those gainfully employed were
engaged in occupations other than agriculture in which there had
remained only 36.1%, a drop of almost a million from the number in 1910
when 84.6% of those gainfully employed were engaged in agriculture.
Equally illustrative of the intensity of the shift is the fact that
the Negro population in 79 major cities increased over 60% in a single
decade, 1920-1930, leaping from 1,920,000 in 1920 to 3,150,000 in 1930.
Even in 1920, at the inception of “the “Black Belt” ballyhoo, this
trend away from the land was clearly indicated, for already at that
time only two-fifths of those gainfully employed were engaged in
agriculture.
The consequences of this urbanization have been far-reaching. The
relation of the Negro to industry has radically altered. Until as late
as 1914, the Negro served as a reserve to draw on in times of labor
shortage or strikes. By 1930 the Negro had become an integral part of
the labor force in practically every important industry.
In the movement away from the land, two peak waves are to be
observed, one in 1916-1919, the other in 1921-24; but they were only a
part of the continuous trend and not a sudden isolated exodus. Once
again we stress that underlying the ebbs and flows of this movement are
not geographic or “sentimental” causes but profound economic forces.
The labor agencies of large industries had a great deal more to do with
it than the activities of the Klu Kluxers in the South.
The Negroes’ function as a labor reserve led to their utilization as
strikebreakers. But from this role of a labor reserve they have become
transformed into integral parts of the industrial structure. Negroes
compose 7.6% of the total labor force in the mining industry; 10.3% in
transport; 7.2% in manufacturing and machine industry. Although they
are only 9.7% of the US population, they composed in 1930, 28% of the
unskilled workers in large meat packing concerns; 16.2% of the
unskilled in the steel industry; and 22.7% of the laborers in building
trades. Instances are not lacking of strikes in which the
proletarianized Negro served as the backbone while the bosses depended
upon Negro strikebreakers primarily recruited from rural districts. The
Negro has definitely become an integral part of the proletariat,
preponderantly unskilled and most intensely exploited.
The Negro problem is and will be to an ever increasing degree a
working class problem; and the crucial criterion is the economic and
not the geographic distribution of the Negro population. By themselves
statistics are meaningless such as that in 1930 almost four-fifths of
the Negro population still lived in the socalled South, or that the
bulk of the Negro population is spread over 24 states and that almost
20% lives in eight northern states (Pa., N.Y., N.J., Ohio, Ill., Mich.,
Missouri, and Indiana), or any other assortment of vital statistics.
What is decisive is the economic content of the figures. And in respect
to the Negro this content is industrial. This does not mean that we
disregard entirely, or intend to minimize the importance of the Negro
farmer. The Negro agrarian problem is an acute and an important one.
However, the American Negro is not predominantly agricultural. He is a
proletarian.
From the revolutionary standpoint the Negro problem is primarily the
problem of gaining over to the revolutionary platform the overwhelming
majority of the Negro workers. The rural Negro can be gained as an ally
only in the same manner, basically, as the rural white, and that is by
being mobilized under the leadership of the proletariat.
From the very beginning the misleaders of the American working class
as a whole and Negroes in particular have tried to drum into the heads
of Negro and white that working class unity could not be achieved
directly. Booker T. Washington did what he could to discourage Negroes
from putting their trust in working class unity. And on the other hand,
the reactionary trade union bureaucracy has drawn racial lines as
rigidly as any Ku Kluxer. The unmasking of the class struggle will
greatly facilitate the political development of American workers, Negro
and white. But we will fail to unite them unless our fundamental
approach to the Negro is the same as to any other worker, taking of
course into consideration that they represent at present the most
backward section of the backward working class, not because they were
colored but because they stem directly from the most backward rural
sections.
The elemental urge to class solidarity has manifested itself time
and again. But these were and remained only episodic beginnings, in the
absence of a genuine revolutionary party. Decades ago, in 1886, the old
Knights of Labor had over 60,000 Negroes organized in its ranks. The
IWW even in the darkest South was able to organize into a single
organization Negroes and whites and lead them to successful strikes
particularly in the lumber industry. In West Virginia, where the
reactionary United Mine Workers of America tried to gain a foothold,
two counties were more than half organized and most of the miners were
Negroes; they were the backbone of the strike. But numerous as these
instances are, they have remained episodic, and the base must be
practically laid anew. One thing is certain: there are no “national”
shortcuts to organizing the Negro workers. The basic slogan is that of class
solidarity, and not at all the slogan of “self-determination”.
Booker T. Washington preached to the Negroes against class
solidarity and tried to imbue them with self-degradation. He said, “the
wisest of my race understand that the agitation of questions of social
equality is the extremest folly ...” He advocated an “alliance” with
the wealthy whites against the “white trash”, i.e., against the white
workers who are the “oppressors and scoundrels, who hold Negroes in
contempt and lynch them”. The Negroes have been taught by the
bourgeoisie to distrust and hate the white workers and vice versa. We
must imbue the Negro with class solidarity. We must say,
“The wisest of the Negro race understand that the
agitation of the question of class solidarity is the only way out for
his race! Class conscious Negro and white workers must teach the Negro
masses and the white that they have only one enemy – their real
lynchers and oppressors – the capitalists.”
J.G. Wright
 
Footnote
1. As the obverse
phase of this shift, we naturally find that the bulk of children,
adolescents as well as the aged remained behind on the land. Thus in
1930 there were:




Negroes


under 5


5-9


10-14


18-19


65 & over




Rural


802,000


900,000


843,000


803,000


233,611




Urban


427,000


468,000


407,000


447,000


139,108







Today, in America, we have entered upon a new and higher stage of the class struggle. With, the sharpening of the class struggle, the true nature of classes, and political parties or tendencies stand out in ever sharper relief. In the light of sharpening contradictions, most revealing of all are the political perspectives put forward by parties or tendencies within the working class. Let us apply this touchstone to the perspectives put forward by the Lovestoneites.
What is the task facing the revolutionist today? According to the Lovestoneites: “to agitate and prepare the ground for the formation of a Labor Party”. What is the historic need of the present moment? According to the Lovestoneites “the fight for a Labor Party.”
In the Workers Age (March 15, 1934) two articles appear proclaiming this perspective: one by H. Connor who deals with the Labor Party in Fort Wayne; the other by S. Jonas & H. Vaughan who deal with the Labor Party in general. Connor reports as an “activist”; Jonas & Vaughan on the other hand, approach the question “as theoreticians”.
Both the activist and the theoreticians argue for the Labor Party from the same premise, a very remarkable premise, to wit, because of the immediate need “to divorce the workers politically from the capitalist class” (Connor); because of “the necessity for the political separation of the working class from the capitalist class.” (Jonas & Vaughan).
From such a premise a Communist would argue not for a Labor Party but for a genuine revolutionary party. Beginning with the Communist Manifesto, all Communists have proclaimed the necessity of separating the proletariat politically from the bourgeoisie, i.e., “the organization of the proletarians into a class, and consequently into a political party”; and it is equally an ABC of Marxism that this task can be achieved only by organizing the vanguard into a revolutionary party Only the revolutionary party can divorce the workers from the capitalists politically.
But the Lovestoneites are not of the opinion that the proposed Labor Party would be revolutionary. No. Jonas & Vaughan deny that such a party would be revolutionary. It should only serve as a rallying point of all workers “regardless of individual differences”. Of course in the very next sentence, our theoreticians proceed to contradict themselves by insisting that such a party “will become more and more revolutionary in its outlook” in the process of the class-struggle. But let us pass in silence this vision of a party which although not revolutionary, will become more and more revolutionary. There is another and much more essential aspect to the question.
The Labor Party, not being revolutionary, cannot achieve the political separation (or divorce) of the working class from the capitalist class. Why then do the Lovestoneites propose its formation? Because they represent the opportunist and not the revolutionary wing in the labor movement. Like all opportunists they drag at the tall end of events; and like all tail-enders the Lovestoneites minimize the elements of class-consciousness, and worship the elements of spontaneity.
They have revived the hoary Menshevik theory preached by Martynov – the theory of “organization process”; the theory of the spontaneous growth of the revolutionary party; and of the spontaneous growth of class-consciousness. Today, on a different historical level, the Lovestoneites are chewing once again the thrice-digested cud of Menshevism. They counterpose the Menshevist concept of the spontaneous political development of the class to the Leninist concept of the vanguard, organized as a party, permeating the working masses with class-consciousness.
After proposing to divorce the workers politically from the capitalists by means of the Labor Party, Jonas, Vaughan, Lovestone and all other Martynovs further propose to make the workers class-conscious by means of the same Labor Party. “It is obvious (!) that no progress can be made in building a revolutionary movement, until workers have first BECOME politically conscious as a class. It is equally obvious (!!) that the tactics of the revolutionary parties have failed to accomplish this” (our italics). Ergo, most obviously, the Labor Party is needed.
In the period of civil wars and revolutions one must for the thousand and first time lecture to the; American Brandlerists the A.B.C. of Marxism. A politically conscious worker is a class-conscious worker. Workers do not become “politically conscious as a class” in the process of the class struggle by themselves, not even if they all joined or voted for a dozen Labor Parties. The revolutionary party is that historical organ by means of which the class becomes class conscious. The workers as a class do not first become politically conscious and then build a revolutionary movement; just the contrary, only if a revolutionary party exists “which does not fail to accomplish” its historic task of mobilizing the overwhelming majority of the workers under its banner can progress be made in building a revolutionary movement.
In 1920, the Leninist Comintern said, “After the defeat of the revolution in 1905, during the course of several years the Russian Mensheviks proclaimed the necessity of a so-called Labor Congress which was to replace the revolutionary party of the working class; all kinds of “laborites” of England’ and America, while consciously carrying oil a bourgeois policy, are propagating among workers the idea of creating Indefinite shapeless workers’ unions instead of a political party.”
In 1934, after the disastrous defeat of the German and Austrian proletariat, and the collapse of the Stalinist Comintern, the Lovestoneites can only repeat the perspectives of the Mensheviki in 1905, and of the “laborites” of England and America in 1920.
The task facing the revolutionist in America today, is the building of a genuine Communist party. The historic need of the present moment is the formation of the Fourth International.
 



Six years ago, on February 16, 1938, Leon Sedov, the oldest son of Natalia Sedov Trotsky and Leon Trotsky, died in a Parisian hospital where he had undergone an operation for appendicitis.
Leon Sedov belonged to a great and heroic generation of the revolutionary youth to whom the world is incalculably indebted. He was a true child of the Russian revolution. He was born on Febmary 24, 1906. His father, Leon Trotsky received the news of his son’s birth in a Czarist prison where he had been incarcerated for his leading role as Chairman of the Petersburg Soviet in the 1905 revolution. Thirteen months later Trotsky escaped from Siberia and together with his family spent the next ten years in exile abroad.
Leon’s childhood years were the years of Czarist reaction, of imperialist preparation for war, and the actual outbreak of the first world slaughter. When Czarism was overthrown in Russia in February 1917, he was only 12 years old. He returned with his parents to revolutionary Petrograd. Thenceforth his entire conscious life became inextricably bound up with the greatest liberationist movement in the history of mankind. Sedov never faltered in his loyalty to the principles and program of October.
Too young to fight in the front lines during the civil war of 1918-1921, he found his place in the ranks of the Komsomol (the Russian Young Communist League) which he joined in 1919, becoming one of its outstanding activists.
In 1923 when Lenin was already on his deathbed, the struggle began against the bureaucratic degeneration of the Bolshevik party which ultimately led to the destruction of the Communist International. If the degeneration and collapse of the Communist (Third) International did not catch the world vanguard unprepared, it was above all due to the heroic struggle of the young Soviet workers who constituted the overwhelming majority of the Russian Left Opposition, and one of whose outstanding leaders was Leon Sedov. The struggle of the Russian Left Opposition preserved the continuity of the revolutionary socialist movement, and made possible the timely reconstitution of the world movement in the Fourth International.
At the same time this struggle profoundly influenced the course of events in the Soviet Union. The bureaucratic degeneration of the workers’ state stemmed, externally, from the defeats of the proletarian revolution in western Europe, and the consequent isolation of the USSR. Internally, it stemmed from the country’s backwardness, inherited from Czarism, and the devastation of the years of imperialist and civil war. Under these conditions the state apparatus infiltrated with tens of thousands of former Czarist functionaries began to progressively degenerate, and this process was transmitted into the ranks of the governing Russian party. 
What They Contributed
The only force that opposed this reactionary development was the Russian Left Opposition, under Trotsky’s leadership. From the outset Leon Sedov took his place in its ranks. Future historians alone will be able to appraise fully the meaning and importance of this five years’ struggle (from 1923 to 1928) against unprecedented odds waged by the isolated proletarian vanguard in Soviet Russia. But it is already clear today that the credit for the introduction of planned economy and the subsequent industrialization of the USSR belongs first and foremost to the Russian Left Opposition. Stalin found himself compelled to adopt its program of industrialization. It was applied with monstrous bureaucratic distortions. But this does not invalidate the great contribution of the Russian Left Opposition; on the contrary, it serves only to underscore the vast possibilities that planned economy opens up for mankind. The unprecedented economic successes of backward Russia under Stalinist misleadership are the harbingers of what the advanced workers of Europe and America will be able to achieve under a regime of genuine workers’ democracy. In paying tribute to the memory of Leon Sedov we are at the same time taking cognizance of what we owe to the entire generation of the young proletarian fighters of the Russian Left Opposition.
Throughout this epic struggle, Sedov remained at Trotsky’s side, carrying out manifold tasks. When Trotsky was exiled to Alma Ata in 1928, Sedov followed him unhesitatingly breaking with his young family. “He acted,” wrote Leon Trotsky, “not only as a son but above all as a co-thinker: It was necessary at all costs to maintain our connections with Moscow.” Sedov played an irreplaceable role in this period, assisting in the work, maintaining connections, serving in place of the secretariat of which Trotsky had been deprived by Stalin.
When Trotsky was exiled to Turkey in 1929, Sedov again accompanied him without hesitation. Collaboration demanded a rigorous division of labor. Sedov, now a man of outstanding talents and independent stature, subordinated himself selflessly and consciously to the task at hand. He wrote little in his own name. That was not because he lacked the ability or talents, but because of the pressure of other work. The few things he did write belong among the most valuable contributions of the Trotskyist movement.
Of his writings only one has been translated into English. This is his exposure of Stalinist falsifications of the history of the Red Army. This brilliant article is included under the name of N. Markin in Leon Trotsky’s The Stalin School of Falsification.” Sedov’s other two major contributions deal with an analysis of Stakhanovism, and with an exposure of the Moscow frameup trials. The latter was the first public answer to the Stalinist criminals. For at that time the Norwegian authorities submitted to the pressure of the Kremlin and prevented Trotsky from making any public reply by keeping him as a virtual prisoner and then deporting him to Mexico. Sedov’s book, The Moscow Trial,  was mistakenly assumed by the capitalist press to have been written by Trotsky. 
Son, Friend, Fighter
In summing up this period of collaboration with Sedov, Trotsky wrote:
“This collaboration was made possible only because our ideological solidarity had entered into our very blood and marrow: beginning with 1928 his name ought to be rightfully placed alongside of mine on almost all the books I have written since 1928.” (Leon Sedov — Son, Friend, Fighter,  by Leon Trotsky.)
From July 1929 until the day he died, Sedov served as the editor of the Bulletin of the Russian Opposition,  the only Russian organ of genuine Bolshevism since Lenin’s death.
The last years of his life Sedov spent working in Berlin and Paris. He remained in Germany for several weeks after Hitler came to power. In Paris he worked under the continual surveillance of the GPU.
The criminals and traitors in the Kremlin never for a moment underestimated the role and importance of Leon Sedov. Stalin spared no efforts to besmirch his name. GPU spies and assassins dogged his every step. They laid trap after trap to kill him. In the infamous Moscow frameups, Sedov’s name invariably figured side by side with that of Leon Trotsky. Stalin’s “judges” condemned both of them in absentia to death. Stalin’s assassins carried out this assignment. They murdered Sedov in Paris in 1938.
He died in the flower of his manhood, deprived of the opportunity to play the great role that was destined to be his in the decisive battles of our generation. His name, his memory and the great tradition he symbolizes remain indelibly inscribed on the spotless banner of the Fourth International which he did so much to found and build.



In September 1920 Italy was on the verge of revolution. A brief
history of this period follows:
The Federation of Metal Workers, which was soon joined by other
unions, including even the Catholic organizations and the nationalist
Italian Labor Alliance, presented the demand for a 35% wage increase
to meet the sky-rocketing prices, and set about to introduce the
8-hour working day by the self-action of the workers. Although the
movement embraced from the very outset more than 500,000 workers, the
Italian capitalists flatly rejected the demands.
The Metal Workers Federation then issued a call for a nationwide
general strike and summoned the workers to seize the factories in the
event of a lock-out. Despite this final warning, the capitalists
answered with lock-outs. The metal workers then proceeded to occupy
more than 300 enterprises in the Milan area alone.
The ruling class and its then reigning Giolitti government were
impotent. The troops could not be relied upon; the government did not
dare call them out. The movement rapidly spread to the metal workers
of all Italy who were joined by the workers in other industries.
Everywhere factories were seized, around them barricades were erected
and machineguns mounted by the workers. The peasants began dividing
the landlords’ estates. Capitalism appeared doomed in Italy. Left
without any resources in their own class, the capitalist could rely
now only on their labor agents.
On September 9, 1920 the Executive Committees of the Socialist
Party and the General Confederation of Labor, controlled by the
Socialist Party, met in joint sessions but could arrive at no
decision. The question was then referred to the plenary sessions of.
the national committee of the General Confederation of Labor. In
other words, the leaders of the Socialist Party had in effect
abdicated; but there was no revolutionary leadership to replace them.
The vital issues of 1921 were settled in Italy within the highest
trade union body.
Gennari (later one of the founders of the Italian Communist Party)
insisted, in the name of the Socialist Party on giving unlimited
support to the movement which had already passed beyond the limits of
economic demands and was actually being transformed into a social
revolution. D’Aragona, the then General Secretary of the
Confederation of Labor and one of the leaders of the reformist right
wing in the Italian SP, demanded that the struggle be confined to
economic demands; and agreed, as a last resort, only to the
introduction of workers’ control of production.
The revolutionary elements were in the ascendancy in the ranks,
but in the top leadership arch-conservatives and vacillators
predominated. The resolution submitted by D’Aragona received the
support of the social patriot Turati, and of Serrati, who at the time
held a centrist position. With the support from the centrists, the
labor lieutenants of Italian capitalism triumphed: D’Aragona’s
resolution received 591,245 votes as against 409,569 votes for
Gennari’s resolution.
As a result of this close vote the leadership of the 1921 movement
definitively passed into the hands of the reformists who met with
Premier Giolitti and on September 15, 1920 formally renounced all
further struggle. They struck a bargain, telling the workers that
they must remain content with a promise of workers’ control and other
concessions, all of which remained on paper.
Betrayed and beheaded, the revolutionary movement of 1920 was
quickly dissipated. The workers were compelled by their reformist
leaders to surrender all their conquests, to return the enterprises
to the capitalists. This plunged the Italian masses into dejection
and apathy. The road for reaction was cleared. In the absence of an
experienced revolutionary leadership capable of executing an orderly
retreat In the face of this terrible defeat through capitulation, the
triumph of reaction in Italy was guaranteed in advance.
The panic-stricken Italian bourgeoisie, saved in its last
extremity by the treachery and cowardice of the reformists, regained
its confidence and staked everything on the fascist gangs. By the end
of September 1920 the revolutionary advance was at a standstill;
November already witnessed the first major assaults of the fascists
against the workers’ organizations (the seizure of Bologna). In the
months that followed, the fascists proceeded systematically to
destroy the Italian labor movement. At the end of 1922 the power
passed into the hands of Mussolini, thus sealing the victory of
counter-revolution in Italy, and stabilizing capitalism there for
another two decades.
J.G.W.


 The propagandists of Mussolini and Hitler have gone, but the Allied and Stalinist liars are continuing where Goebbels left off. The swinish vilification of nationalities continues unabated, with the Japanese and German peoples as targets in place of the “non-Aryans.” We shall deal here only with the case of Germany.
Prior to the crushing of Germany, these gentlemen justified the “Big Three” plans for the military occupation of that country by the need of combatting a large-scale underground Nazi-led resistance movement. Now they aver that the German people are authoritarian by nature, and never evinced any will whatever to anti-Nazi resistance. At the same time, the Allied military authorities install Nazis in office. PM and its Lerners, The Nation and. The New Republic, literary lights like Nobel Prize Winner emigré German novelist Thomas Mann and kindred spirits who parade as champions of progress, culture, and—of course! of course! — anti-fascist struggle—all these liberals repeat the Allied lies; they all allege that the German people must first be “re-educated” to imbue them with a will to resist Nazism.
In these quarters it has even become fashionable to lament the “failure” of the German masses to overthrow Hitler’s regime. Naturally, the source of this argument makes it highly suspect, coming, as it does, from such servile flunkeys of the imperialist cannibals. It emanates from the very people who are without a spark of revolutionary ardor, and who manifest in any serious struggle, only a will to retreat.
The hall-mark of a revolutionist is his readiness to fight the masters and oppressors at home. It is cheap enough to favor struggle and revolution abroad, especially one that hasn’t yet taken place, and especially, in the milieu the fascists found the easiest to cow. And this not accidently.
For the argument from revolution is now being used by the people who are the most terrified of and by revolution. They hate it instinctively. They, like all “friends of the Soviet Union,” accept the revolution, only after it has conquered, and then only after it has been shackled. What they hail and accept in the USSR is not the revolution but the rule of the Stalinist bureaucracy and the degeneration that ensued after the revolution. Such are the individuals who now talk so pompously about the “failure” of the masses in Germany to make a revolution against Hitler.
This canard of “failure” is even more insidious and cunning than the racial-degeneracy and atrocity campaign, because it is an appeal not solely to emotions but to reason. And, on the surface, it does sound like a plausible political argument. Even in Lenin’s time, during the Civil War, complaints were occasionally voiced at the “failure” of the Western European proletariat to come to the aid of the Russian Revolution. Lenin never permitted such remarks to pass unnoticed, pointing out that an attitude of this sort was “unworthy of internationalists.” Essentially the same argument is employed today primarily to confuse the class conscious workers in America and to weaken their instinct of international solidarity. It is a hook baited for all those who lack scientific knowledge of a revolution and its decisive factors.
In the first place, did the German revolution necessarily have to erupt in the very course of the war? No one can predict the exact date of revolutions. Marxists leave such occupations to numerologists, astrologers and crystal gazers.   
Wars and Revolutions The interrelationship between wars and revolutions is neither simple nor automatic. Wars sometimes act to retard revolutions. Trotsky pointed out long ago that the Russian revolution was retarded in 1914 precisely by the inception of World War I. Nor are the ruling classes unaware of this. To cite only one instance, Czarism engaged in the Russo-Japanese war of 1904, calculating in this way to avert revolution.
On the other hand, situations frequently arise in peacetime, which are the most favorable for revolution. The dialectic of wars and revolutions has been popularly explained many times. In a reply to a question as to the “desirability of war as furthering the interests of Socialism,” Trotsky elucidated:
It is almost the same as if the question were asked: What is your opinion of cholera and epidemics for human civilization? (Laughter) When there was cholera—there was in Russia, and is now from time to time—we revolutionists sought by illegal leaflets to help the peasants. We denounced the regime of the Czar. You know it is an interesting parallel. The Black Hundreds, our specific Russian reactionaries, accused us of spreading the germs of cholera. There were pogroms against the doctors, the students, the radical intelligentsia, and Jews, as a vengeance for spreading cholera. It was the measure of the reaction to reject the responsibility about sanitary conditions and to place it on the radical elements. I thank you very much for your question because I find the analogy very important. I assure you, under Czarism we had twenty-five years of revolutionary activity, and I never asked for cholera. (Laughter) The same with war. If war comes in spite of us, we will use all the means to place the responsibility on the ruling classes and to accelerate the revolution. But to wish a war—it is absurd from every point of view. What do we need with artificial means for revolution? We have a revolution in Spain without war, but we are not capable of being victorious yet. We had in Germany two and three revolutions. There was in 1918, and in 1923 during the Ruhr occupation, a totally revolutionary situation. Before the victory of Hitler we had a totally revolutionary situation. The lack was not objective revolutionary situations, but revolutionary parties which had the necessary confidence of the masses and adequate leadership. Now, we need the creation of such parties and such leadership. For that we need time, and not to provoke artificial revolutionary situations with the purpose of losing them and so to allow millions of workers, hundreds of thousands to perish in defeat. (The Case of Leon Trotsky, pp.306-7.)
Revolutions do arise out of war, but not in accordance with any time-table set in advance. Depending upon the objective situation, the alignment of class forces and the mood of the masses, the revolution can break out either during the war, or during its aftermath.
The revolutionary wave reached its crest in Western Europe in the era of World War I, not during the hostilities but in the course of the liquidation period of the war (1918-1919) and after Versailles (Germany, 1923). Another revolutionary wave in Western Europe followed after the economic crisis of 1928.
The argument that the Germans were obliged to make the revolution “somehow” during the war is false from the standpoint of theory. Such an approach is purely fatalistic. If the masses were able, of their own accord, to make revolutions there would be no need whatever of programs, parties, leadership.   
False in Practice From the standpoint of practice, this approach seeks to impose fantastic demands on the masses, especially on those who had experienced defeats in the entire previous period. It is the masses who pay for the defeats. After the massacre of the Paris Commune, the revolutionary movement in France remained dormant for years. The defeat of the 1905 revolution in Russia led to more than six years of prostration. The German proletariat has shown, if anything, the most remarkable recuperative powers.
Betrayed by the Social Democratic leadership in the 1918 revolution, with its vanguard decimated in the Spartacus uprising of 1919, and again in the adventurist “March Action” of 1921, the German workers were nevertheless marching toward power in 1923. This time they fell victims of a vacillating Brandlerite leadership, which, with the backing of Zinoviev-Bukharin-Stalin in the Communist International, let slip one of the most favorable revolutionary situations in history. Yet six years later the German workers were prepared to fight the rising Nazi movement to the death. Once again they were betrayed (1929-1933) both by the Social Democrats and by the Stalinists. Not the masses but their official leadership permitted Hitler to assume power without a battle.
Six years of Nazi peacetime rule were followed by six years of imperialist war. Vast as the powers of the German working class are, they are not inexhaustible. Even the best-led armies need time to recover from a single defeat, let alone a series of defeats in the course of three decades. The German workers have not only needed breathing spells, but have lacked the decisive instrument in the struggle—revolutionary leadership.
From recent—and past—history of the German working class not a single instance can be cited of the refusal of the ranks to respond, in a revolutionary situation, to the summons of the leadership. In every instance the masses did all they were asked to do, and more. They suffered three defeats, each more catastrophic than the one before. Upon whom ought the responsibility be placed for these defeats and any apathy resulting from them? We say, upon the official leadership, the Social Democrats and the Stalinists.
What did the official leadership do in all the peace and war years to prepare Hitler’s overthrow? What program did they offer? What revolution were they preparing to lead?
The Kremlin and all its foreign agents—including those in Germany — first collaborated with Hitler and then with the Anglo-American imperialists. The German Social Democrats in emigration remained throughout tied to the “democratic” imperialists.
What alternative to fascism did the Allies and the Kremlin (or the liberals) offer to the German people? No propaganda more calculated to strengthen the Nazi regime and to imbue the German people with the conviction that Hitler was their sole recourse could have been devised by Goebbels than the propaganda supplied him by Washington, London and the Kremlin.   
Mass Anti-Nazi Resistance They and their agents have done everything in their power to add their own brands of poison to the virus disseminated abroad by Nazism. They and their agents have done and are doing everything in their power to crush every manifestation of revolution in Germany and everywhere else.
Needless to say the Gestapo did not remain idle all this while, either. They crushed every oppositional element, arresting or shooting the most courageous and devoted fighters, in order thus to terrorize the masses and keep them beheaded.
What would have been so astonishing about moods of apathy or cautious watchfulness throughout this period? But the German workers are really cast in a heroic mold. Even amid the incredible havoc of the war, in the shambles of bombed cities, they have fought the Nazi regime in war as they had in peace. The very horror camps—Buchenwald, Dachau, Belsen—used in newsreels, press, radio and pulpit as proof of congenital German degeneracy, were filled—as they have been from the outset—by the political opponents of Nazidom. This truth is now cutting a way for itself in the world public conscience.
Recently sufficient evidence has seeped through the Allied military censorship, to stamp indelibly the brand of infamy on all the vilifiers of the German masses. This evidence consists of official Gestapo records of arrests and death sentences in “Greater Germany” from the outbreak of the war to the autumn of 1944. This news was released by the London Tribune, organ of the Laborite “lefts.” Our citation is from a digest of the London Tribune  report made by The Call (June 18):
“The total number of death sentences in the ‘Greater German Reich’ for 1943 was 5,326, as against 3,660 in 1942; 1,292 in 1941; and 926 in 1940. For 1943 we know the detailed distribution of this total. 1,421 out of the 5,336 death sentences refer to non-Germans, i.e., 894 sentences pronounced in the ‘occupied Eastern territories,’ 282 for ‘crimes against the occupying power,’ 138 for ‘sabotage and insubordination by foreign workers,’ 66 for ‘sabotage in the Protectorate,’ 39 for ‘retention of arms by citizens of the Protectorate,’ and 2 for ‘retention of arms by Poles’.
“Disregarding the thousands of deaths of Germans in Nazi concentration camps the London Tribune notes, there were 1,883 political sentences against Germans in that same year, for ‘high treason, undermining of the armed forces of the nation, desertion, and crimes against broadcasting laws.’ Another 2,034 death sentences occurred for ‘crimes against the war economy, race pollution, and against the decree protecting the winter relief.’
“The figures of the Gestapo arrests during the first half of 1944 are even more startling. They amount to more than 310,000 for the Greater Reich including the annexed territories — 133,853 for the first quarter and 176,660 for the second. That makes 2,000 arrests a day for the three months preceding July 20 and the subsequent wave of mass arrests.”
Added to this irrefutable proof of large-scale mass resistance, we have also proof that the anti-Nazi fighters not only had but still retain the support of the population as a whole. Despite Allied prohibition of demonstrations, the allegedly “passive” Germans have already given ample proof of their will to struggle. Suffice it to cite a single instance. The May 25 issue of Maple Leaf, the daily paper of the Canadian forces reported:
An unauthorized meeting of 6,000 Germans at Cologne was broken up by US troops who fired over their heads.
The meeting was organized to welcome Germans returning home from Buchenwald. The crowd was dispersed after signs appeared expressing dissatisfaction with the mildness with which the Americans were treating the Nazis.
In the very teeth of Anglo-American imperialist terror the German masses are waging the struggle against Nazism which they began in 1933, intensified during the war, and are continuing under Allied occupation.
The same betrayers who are responsible for the tragic lot of these heroic fighters are now crowning their crimes by chiming in the vilifaction of the German people. The worst betrayers have ever been the worst vilifiers. In its latest Manifesto the German Stalinist Party “repeats the charge that the German people bear guilt and responsibility” for the crimes of the Nazis. What program do they offer to “rehabilitate” Germany? They oppose the sovietization of the country. They start where the despicable Social Democracy left off at Weimar. They propose to repeat the same course that led to the rise of Nazism after Weimar.
The heroic workers of Germany will yet give a fitting answer to all their executioners, betrayers and slanderers.
There is only one force that can inspire the German people, restore their confidence in themselves and in the revolutionary solution. That force is the proletarian party of Trotskyism.
The objective conditions have been ripe for the revolution ever since the first imperialist war. The German workers have proved over and over again their unconquerable will to struggle. The task today is to constitute the indispensable instrument of the revolution—the German Section of the Fourth International, the party that would sweep aside the discredited, crime-splotched Social Democratic and Stalinist Parties and lead the German proletariat to victory. That day of historical vengeance must and will come.
Then, the great people of Germany whose true national traits and contributions to mankind’s progress and culture remain second to none, will, under the leadership of the working class, unfold all their colossal creative powers. They will make their greatest contributions in the coming German revolution, and Germany will take her rightful place among the Socialist United States of Europe.




The Bonomi government, whose precarious reign has been marked by increasing mass misery recurring scandals and political crises, tottered last week as thousands of Italian workers bearing Red flags demonstrated outside the Quirinal Palace in Rome. They later marched to the government headquarters to present a written demand to Bonomi that he resign.
The immediate cause of the demonstration and the resulting political crisis was the “escape” of the notorious fascist General Mario Roatta from a military hospital. Roatta had been transferred there on the pretext of “heart trouble” in the midst of a month-old trial.
 
Roatta’s Record
All the circumstances surrounding the Roatta case serve to expose the cynical pretense that the Bonomi government is conducting any sort of struggle against the fascists and their accomplices. Roatta was one of Mussolini’s most, trusted henchmen. Italian workers know him as one of their bitterest enemies. He was one of the cruel butchers of the Ethiopians.
When Mussolini sent his Black Shirt detachments to help Franco in Spain, Roatta was placed in command. He ordered helpless refugees on the roads machine-gunned. He later added to his bestial record of repressions in the Balkans, where his activities led to his being classified among the “war criminals” sought by the Yugoslav and Greek partisans.
Mussolini, in one of his last moves to preserve his rule, appointed Roatta as Chief of Staff. In the revelations since Mussolini’s downfall it has been established that Rotta was the bloody head of the secret spy machine whose assignment, was the murder of anti-fascists abroad. Specifically he is implicated in the assassination of the anti-fascist Roselli brothers, organizers of the Action Party,
After the collapse of Mussolini, this criminal turned up not on the gallows but in the Badoglio government, where he resumed his post of Chief of Staff. Despite vehement protests, he was not removed from this post until September 1944. Thereafter he escaped arrest for several more months.
When apprehended by the antifascists in November 1944, he was saved from summary justice at the workers’ hands by the authorities who succeeded in placing him in the Regina Coeli jail. Next came months of postponement before he was finally placed on trial. Then followed the legal farce, the brazen transfer to a military hospital, and his easy walkout.
The complicity of the Bonomi government is underscored by the fact that the chief of the Carabinieri, entrusted with “guarding” Roatta, was a general who had served on Roatta’s staff. The removal of this general after Roatta’s escape is a public admission of his guilt.
The telltale threads in the Roatta case go beyond the Bonomi government straight to the House of Savoy. It is no secret that Roatta was – and is – close to King Victor Emmanuel. Nor were the Italian demonstrators unaware of this. They made their protest against the fascist protectors and collaborators under the windows of the royal residence at the Quirinal.
But Roatta and his vile breed have more highly placed protectors. The Allied authorities cannot evade their responsibility. How anxious Churchill, for example, is to thwart the will of the Italian masses is clearly evidenced by his insistence upon the removal of Sforza as head of the committee in charge of the trials of the fascists. Even the conservative Sforza was not to be entrusted with so delicate a matter!
Nor is it hard to understand why. The entire ruling class of Italy is besmirched and compromised after twenty years of direct collaboration with Mussolini and his thugs. Very few Italian capitalists, least of all the royalty, could escape their lives if a half-serious attempt were undertaken to weed out the criminal crew.
It also provided the occasion for further revealing the treacherous role of the Stalinists. They first sought to divert the rage of the masses by confining action to a protest meeting in the Colosseum and a peaceful demonstration. But as the workers marched to the Quirinal Palace they were met by mounted Carabinieri, perhaps the same ones that helped Rotta escape. When the charge with drawn swords failed to disperse the angry demonstrators, they were subjected to grenades, rifle fire and sub-machine-gun volleys. One man was killed and a score wounded.
The Stalinist, Socialist and Action Party leaders alike thereupon felt that they were obliged to demand Bonomi’s resignation. Among the signatures appended to this demand was that of Velio Spano, editor of l’Unità and member of the Stalinist Central Committee. But it was Stalinist intervention that saved the utterly discredited Bonomi government, Stalinist Togliatti, the Kremlin’s agent in Italy, insisted that a reshuffle would suffice. A four man commission – a liberal, a Stalinist, a Christian-Democrat and a “labor democrat,” – has now been appointed to supervise the “purge.”
Meanwhile Roatta remains at large. As if to emphasize the mockery, the High Court has continued his trial in absentia.
 




The plans for Germany agreed upon by Roosevelt, Churchill and Stalin might be summarized briefly as follows: The bloodiest and most destructive war in history is to be consummated in the cruellest and most destructive “peace” ever imposed by conquerors upon the conquered. It is the deliberate resolve of the Crimea conferees that “Germany shall never rise again.” To this end Germany’s territories are to be dismembered and her industries crushed. Her people are to remain enslaved under the despotic rule of Allied military authorities. According to a UP dispatch, Feb. 8, some Washington officials are talking of “occupation in terms of ‘until 2000 AD’ – a matter of 50 to 55 years.
A further inkling of the savage treatment in store for the German people was given, by an official spokesman of the American Seventh Army. N.Y. Times, Feb. 17, quotes this brass hat as disclaiming all Allied interest “in the people of Germany as a nation,” and asserting that no effort whatever would be made “to restore German industry.” Moreover, “no food will be brought into the country .... until their own supplies sink below the level at which a race can exist.”
The same official then goes on to explain: “The German diet may be allowed to fall below a level of 1,350 calories a person daily before we do anything about it.” The minimum daily requirements of an adult are estimated at 3,000 calories. A diet “below 1,350 calories” is tantamount to slow death by starvation. Cannibals appear like humanitarians alongside these “democratic" imperialist ghouls.
 
Dooms All Europe
What are the economic consequences of all these hellish plans for Europe? The key to Europe’s recovery is the great industrial apparatus of Germany and above all, the greatest productive force in Europe, namely: the German working class. Failing these, there is no way out of devastation and hunger for the peoples of Europe. Germany’s doom is their doom.
The bulk of Europe’s heavy industry is concentrated in Germany whose steel industry, machine tool and electrical plants, locomotive shops and shipbuilding yards are the largest on the continent. N.Y. Times acknowledges that out of Germany comes 60 percent of Europe’s coal, 50 percent of its pig iron and steel, and “even larger proportions of aluminum, electrical machinery and machine tools.” How can European industry possibly revive without these?
This chief organ of U.S. imperialism further acknowledges that the plans of the “Big Three” necessarily mean “an economic imbalance in Europe.” That is to say, every blow to German industry is at the same time a blow to the economic life of Europe as a whole. What the N.Y. Times omits to say is that the permanent “economic imbalance of Europe” is one of the principal planks in Wall Street’s program of world domination. To rule the world, Wall Street and all its agencies must keep Europe from ever rising again as a powerful rival. So long as Germany remains crushed, Europe is rendered impotent.
 
German Agriculture
The so-called Morgenthau plan – apparently adopted at Yalta – to turn Germany into an agricultural country is only a cynical cover for this bestial program of “peacetime” destruction. In the first place German agriculture is one of the most artificial branches of European economy. The ground cultivated is not naturally fertile and requires much artificial fertilizer. As Business Week states editorially in its Feb. 17 issue: “Germany’s agriculture has always been high cost, able to exist only by favor of very high protective tariffs. An agricultural Germany would find it almost impossible to trade its farm products for manufactures.” Germany has had to import the bulk of its food supplies and of industrial raw materials.
Moreover, as Business Week likewise points out, the projected partition of Germany “not only would weaken Germany but further unbalance it – cutting off almost one-third of its 1937 feed output, and over 30 percent of its coal-steel as against only one- sixth of its population. The remaining Germany of fabricating industries – machinery, chemicals, textiles – would then almost completely lack raw materials and markets.”
Finally, agriculture could never support Germany’s present population. Thus the destruction of Germany’s industrial, power entails the destruction of a large section of her population, above all, of her working class.
The three gravediggers of civilization, who once again met in secrecy, are conspiring first and foremost against the working class of Germany. This is their main enemy whom they want to atomize, to starve into submission, to drown in oceans of blood. For they know that once the mighty German proletariat rises, the insurgent masses of France, Italy, Greece, Belgium, Holland and the rest of tortured, agonized Europe will move to fuse ranks in the joint struggle for the Socialist United States of Europe.
Stalin knows that the Socialist uprising of the German proletariat will act instantly to revive the traditions and program of the October 1917 Revolution and cause the Soviet masses to resume the Leninist road from which they have so long been diverted by the usurpers and betrayers in the Kremlin.
To prevent the peoples of Europe from finding their salvation along the road of Socialism, the victory-flushed Anglo-American imperialists in alliance with the Kremlin must aim their most savage blows at the German workers. This is the real meaning of their program for Germany.
 




The cynical pledges of the Crimea conferees not to rest until “Nazism is destroyed” are given the lie direct by the policy of Allied military authorities in occupied German areas. The whole sordid story of Allied collaboration with the Hitlerite scum still remains to be told. But enough has already been made public to enable even the most gullible to tell just what the score is.
Let us take, for example, the setup in Aachen. According to recent exposures in the London Daily Express and the N.Y. PM, the government there was entrusted completely to “reactionaries,” that is, either avowed Nazis or their henchmen. “Out of 325 city officials, 57 were Nazis.” Appointed as Mayor was a big business executive, Oppenhof, formerly personnel manager of the Veltrup munitions works. Not a single genuine fighter against Fascism, no member of the German underground was included among these Aachen officials.
In short, Aachen was governed under the Allies in virtually the same way – and even by many of the same individuals – as under Hitler. When news of this leaked out, there was a reshuffling. Some of the Nazis were replaced by less notorious elements, but again the genuine anti-Nazi forces in Aachen were completely excluded.
Aachen is the rule and not an exception. The columnist Dorothy Thompson has made the flat charge that “nowhere have we (i.e. the “democracies”) bestowed office upon men with a clean anti-Nazi record, as indicated, for instance, by a concentration camp career.” This charge has not been denied. It can’t be. It is the truth. The exclusion of even the mildest anti-Nazis is part of a calculated Allied policy.
 
Deal with Nazis
This does not prevent the Stalinists or cowardly liberals, like the editors of PM, from trying to cover up for the Allies. For instance, PM’s Max Lerner cabled from Aachen that the situation there was simply the product of “incredible blunder and political naivete on the part of the original Military Government setup here.”
This assertion is made in the face of such statements as the one issued by an official spokesman of the American Seventh Army to the effect that the only Nazis to be removed from office were those whose membership in the fascist party dated prior to 1933.
The N.Y. Times, central organ of American imperialism, does not hesitate to interpret the gist of Crimea decisions as they relate to political life for Germany precisely in the same sense as have the Allied military authorities in Aachen. Thus, the Times Paris correspondent cabled, Feb. 19, that “it is considered too early now to deal with German refugees, anti-Nazi organizations or Free Germans.”
In the meantime, if is obvious, the Allies propose to “deal” only with Nazis and pro-Nazis, as they have been doing. While Roosevelt, Churchill and Stalin proclaim it is impermissible to differentiate between the Nazis and the German people, they themselves proceed to draw a line of distinction – against the anti- Nazi elements and in favor of the Hitlerites themselves.
Expressed in this policy is the determination of Washington, London and Moscow not to permit the German masses to have any voice in determining their own destiny. They hope to repeat on an even vaster scale their feats in Italy.
The weekly U.S. News, March 2, blurts this out:
“One reason why top German Nazis are not being named formally as war criminals at this stage is that there is hope and even expectation that some one among their number will turn out to be a Darlan or a Badoglio ...”
 



The objective economic and political conditions of the “United Nations Charter” world differ considerably from those that prevailed after the Peace of Versailles. Despite these differences, the “peace” and “postwar security” issuing out of World War II is strikingly parallel to the “peace” and “security” that followed the termination of hostilities in 1918. This is hardly surprising. Identical class causes tend to produce identical class results. Nothing except an imperialist peace could possibly come out of an imperialist war, unless the proletarian revolution first intervened.
The peace frolic of the first world holocaust was staged in Geneva, Switzerland, on January 10, 1920, when the representatives of the victorious Entente formally launched the League of Nations. Essentially the same obscene fraud was repeated on April 25, 1945, at San Francisco when the Anglo-American imperialists jointly with the Kremlin formed the “United Nations.” The League of Nations came into existence automatically under the Versailles Treaty; the “United Nations” was hatched, even before the signing of any peace, in the secret conferences of the “Big Three” at Moscow, Teheran, Yalta, and it was preceded by such purely decorative gatherings as the one at Dumbarton Oaks.
The League of Nations, according to Lenin, was an unification “on paper only; in reality it is a group of beasts of prey, who only fight one another and do not at all trust one another.” (Lenin’s Collected Works, Vol.XXV, p.297, Third Russian Edition) He branded the League as a Thieves’ Kitchen, a “piece of fakery from beginning to end; it is a deception from beginning to end; it is a lie from beginning to end.” (Idem, p.97) Lenin’s position was also that of Leon Trotsky. It was the position of the Communist International in Lenin’s lifetime.
If the League of Nations is inseparable from the Versailles Treaty and the secret diplomacy which produced it, then the “United Nations” is the product of the super-secret Washington-Kremlin-London diplomacy and equally inseparable from it. Like the League of Nations, the “United Nations” bears all the features of the source from which it sprang – the second imperialist slaughter. It is inseparably bound up with a super-Versailles, still unsigned. It is calculated to counteract and to destroy any and all insurgent movements of the European peoples, above all Germany. It is aimed to perpetuate the existing inequality among nations rather than to establish any genuine equality among them. The chances for a peaceful coexistence of nations and harmonious collaboration among them are far slimmer under the “United Nations” than they were in the days of the League.
Structurally the “United Nations” organization differs in name only from the defunct League. In place of the latter’s executive body, the San Francisco Conference set up a “Security Council.” The utterly impotent International Labor office has been supplanted by an “Economic and Social Council.” The emptier the barrel, the more noise it makes. As for the “World Court,” the guiding spirits of San Francisco did not even bother to change the name, retaining the old one: International Court of Justice.
The similarity between the League and the “United Nations” extends even to the leading figures. Many of the participants at Geneva bobbed up again at San Francisco. Columnist Samuel Grafton was among those dismayed by “an array of depressingly familiar faces, and the feeling is that those who couldn’t do it once are going to try to do it again.” (New York Post, April 30)
To cover up this insolent repetition of bankrupt policies, the propagandists of Anglo-American imperialism and the pen-prostitutes of the Kremlin have been proclaiming with unbounded cynicism that the Versailles Peace was a “soft” peace; and that in this softness are rooted the causes both for the failure of the League of Nations as well as for the outbreak of World War II.
Had Versailles been “hard,” they allege, the League of Nations would not have turned into the soft, poisonous, reeking slime it actually turned out to be. It goes without saying that this same lie of lies serves concurrently to justify the bestial crushing of Germany, the enslavement and vilification of the German people and spoliation of Europe as a whole by the “democratic” imperialists and their Kremlin ally. Let us yield the floor to two of history’s most candid, unimpeachable and incorruptible witnesses [1], in order (1) to expose the lies of Washington-Moscow-London; and (2) to cast additional light on the abysmal degeneracy of the “Big Three.”
Lenin and Trotsky characterized the Treaty of Versailles, signed by the German delegation on January 28, 1919, as a peace of imperialist pillage, rapine and oppression. The treaty imposed in 1918 by the victors upon the vanquished was “infamous and ignoble,” “utterly permeated with cruelty, greed and baseness” (Trotsky). It was the peace of “plunderers and robbers” “a hundred times more humiliating, rapacious and predatory than the Peace of Brest-Litovsk” (Lenin).
Upon the signing of the Versailles Treaty, Lenin declared:
A peace has been imposed on Germany, but it is a usurer’s peace, a strangler’s peace, a butcher’s peace; because they have plundered and dismembered Germany and Austria. They have deprived these countries of all the means of livelihood; they have left children to starve and die of starvation. It is an unheard-of robbers’ peace. And so what is the Versailles Peace? It is an unheard-of robber’s peace which has plunged tens of millions, including the most civilized peoples, into a condition of slavery. This is no peace but a set of conditions dictated to a helpless victim by highwaymen with knives in hand. (Loc. cit., vol.XXV, pp.417-18.)
While Versailles was still in its preparatory stages, Lenin insisted:
We see that they are preparing a Peace for Germany that amounts to regular strangulation and is more coercive than the Peace of Brest-Litovsk. (Loc. cit., vol.XXIII, p.283, English Edition.)
 
Lenin and Trotsky on Versailles and the League of Nations
Lenin and Trotsky alike were not taken by surprise by the unprecedented harshness of Versailles. They knew its authors and their goal, namely: to serve the interests of their respective imperialisms. The views of Lenin and Trotsky appear in literally scores of articles, speeches, books and programmatic documents. Among the latter is the resolution on Versailles passed by the Fourth World Congress (1922) of the Comintern. This resolution characterizes the treaty as an “attempt to stabilize the world domination of the four victorious states [the United States, England, France and Japan] through the reduction – politically and economically – of the rest of the world to the status of colonies and semi-colonies.” The imperialist victors of World War II have an identical program.
The Communist International under Lenin stresses that the Versailles Treaty was in reality the most powerful lever created by the victorious bourgeoisie for the purpose of extending their political and economic domination over the European continent. The League of Nations served simply as a fulcrum for that lever, a role that is now assigned to the “United Nations.”
In Lenin’s estimation, Versailles constituted irrefutable proof of his analysis of imperialism. And among Lenin’s theses on imperialism a main one is that capitalism in its final stage of development renders all imperialists, regardless of the political form of their rule, equally reactionary. No distinction whatever can be drawn among the imperialists, insisted Lenin:
The history of recent times, (the history of the war and post-war period, is distinguished by an extraordinary speed of development, and it proves the thesis that British and French imperialism is just as infamous as German imperialism. Idem., p. 330.)
He repeated this indefatigably:
... These spokesmen, these protectors of democracy, these Wilsons and the like, are imposing on the vanquished people treaties of their own a good deal worse than the Brest-Litovsk Peace imposed on us. (Idem, p.439.)
And again:
The Versailles Peace has demonstrated even to imbeciles and the blind, even to the mass of myopic people that the Entente was and remained an imperialist brigand just as bloody and dirty as Germany. This could have been overlooked only by hypocrites and liars, consciously transmitting bourgeois polities into the labor movement, or by the direct agents and errand-boys of the bourgeoisie (labor lieutenants of capital, in the words of the American socialists); or by people who have so succumbed to bourgeois ideas and bourgeois influence as to become socialists only in words, while in their deeds they remain petty bourgeois, philistines, chorus boys of the capitalists. (Loc. cit., vol.XXIV, p.389.)
In Lenin’s eyes only hypocrites or liars could draw a distinction in favor of the “democratic” imperialists; only direct agents and errand-boys of the bourgeoisie could stoop to defend Versailles. But the Stalinists have gone even beyond this during the Second World War, when the Kremlin began by drawing distinctions in favor of the “peace-loving” Nazi imperialists and ended by hailing and collaborating with the “peace-loving” and “democratic” imperialists. They prescribe treatment for Germany and other European countries that really does make Versailles seem “soft” by comparison. And, finally, the Kremlin is aiding directly in the Allied attempts to stifle the European revolution.
From the Leninist standpoint, it is least of all permissible to spread any illusions about the role of either the United States or any “world security” organization it initiates or sponsors. Thus, in the days of Versailles and the League Lenin insisted that both imperialist camps were equally reactionary, and he especially warned:
By now it is clear to all the appetites of the Allied imperialists even exceed those of the German: the terms they have demanded of Germany are even worse than the Brest-Litovsk Peace; and, what is more, they are out to stifle the revolution generally and act as international gendarmes. (Loc. cit., vol.XXIII, p.317. English Edition.)
And Trotsky wrote:
Under the “League of Nations” flag, the United States made an attempt to extend to the other side of the ocean its experience with a federated unification of large, multi-national masse – an attempt to chain to its chariot of gold, the peoples of Europe arid other parts of the world, and bring them under Washington’s rule. In essence the League of Nations was intended to be a world monopoly corporation, “Yankee and Co.”
The American bourgeoisie is jamming through today the same program that it sought but failed to apply after 1914-1918. The “United Nations” charter is designed to finally install the “world monopoly corporation, ‘Yankee and Co.’” Thus far, the Kremlin’s sole objection has been to the role assigned to it by Wall Street. Stalin wants to be promoted from the ranks of a junior partner to that of a senior.
What sort of peace will and must the “United Nations” impose? The Stalinists swear it can and will be a “people’s peace.” They are merely parroting the words of Woodrow Wilson who hailed Versailles as a “people’s peace.” To counter this hypocrisy and deception, Lenin and the Bolsheviks compared Versailles with the Brest-Litovsk Peace, which the young Soviet Republic was compelled to sign, and which was universally denounced at the time as the most rapacious, ruthless peace ever imposed by victors upon a vanquished foe. Needless to mention the “democratic” Allies were the loudest in their spurious indignation. The Allied Supreme War Council issued a statement in London protesting against the Brest Peace as a set of “political crimes which, under the name of German peace, have been committed against the Russian people.” These bourgeois Tartuffes jesuitically lamented that the Brest provisions were so onerous that “Russian economic life was reduced by it (Brest Peace) to a shadow ...”
One of the authoritative spokesmen of the English Tories, Lord Cecil shrieked in horror at the news of the most “hypocritical part” of the Brest-Litovsk Treaty, namely: the indemnities clause which, according to Lord Cecil, “imposed one of the heaviest war indemnities ever levied.” For his part, Woodrow Wilson fulminated not only against Brest, but also against the Bolsheviks. In Wilson’s eyes, Brest-Litovsk was a “cheap triumph in which no brave or gallant nation can long take pride. A great people, helpless by their own act, lies for the time at their mercy.”
This did not hinder the same Wilson from imposing a peace on Germany which surpassed many times the savagery of the Brest Peace; nor do the successors of Wilson hesitate to treat defeated Germany with a savagery which surpasses by far the savagery of Versailles.
Where Versailles provided for the military occupation of sections of Germany, today all of Germany and Austria, not to mention the rest of Western and Eastern Europe, groans under military occupation. Nor have the victors the slightest intention of withdrawing their troops. When Monarchist Germany of the Hohenzollerns tried to impose the military occupation of Moscow in its peace terms, the young and weak Workers’ Republic firmly resisted. The Junkers were forced to withdraw their demand. Here is what Lenin said in 1918 about the military occupation clause in the Versailles Treaty:
This is the peace which those who cried that the Bolsheviks are traitors because they signed the Brest-Litovsk Peace are now imposing on a comparatively weak state that is already falling to pieces. When the Germans wanted to send their soldiers to Moscow, we said that we would rather lay down our lives in battle to a man than consent to such a thing ... And now the democratic soldiers of England and France are to be used to “maintain order” ... We know what this order means. It means that the British and American soldiers are to act as butchers and hangmen of the world revolution. (Loc. cit., vol.XXIII, p.282. English Edition. )
Today, the imperialist spokesmen together with the Stalinists and all the liberals – from all the Lerners of PM to the writers of The Nation and The New Republic – proclaim that military occupation is the principal guarantee of peace. In his day, Lenin viewed it as a deliberate act of aggression against the revolutionary peoples. Just what has altered since Lenin’s day to impel any one who is not gullible or a Stalinist knave to take a different position?
Lenin denied that the imperialists could employ their troops with impunity to crush the rising revolution in Europe. Lenin, like Trotsky, based his revolutionary optimism on the impact of Versailles and the League of Nations upon the consciousness of the war-weary masses, upon the sharp break in mass moods that suffering, disillusionment and indignation would bring. In the Manifesto of the Second World Congress (July-August 1920) Leon Trotsky wrote:
Workers and Peasants of Europe, America, Asia, Africa and Australia! You have suffered ten million dead, twenty million wounded and crippled. Today you at least know what you have gained at this price!
In an introduction written in 1920 for the then projected French and German editions of his book, Imperialism, Lenin stated:
The Brest-Litovsk Peace, dictated by monarchist Germany, followed by the infinitely more bestial and ignominious Versailles Peace, dictated by the “democratic” American and French Republics along with “free” England – all this has performed a most beneficent service to mankind, by exposing both the hired pen-and-ink coolies of imperialism as well as the reactionary townspeople, even if they do call themselves pacifists and socialists – the same townspeople who sang paeans of praise to ‘Wilsonism’ and who argued that peace and reforms are possible under imperialism.” (Loc. cit., vol.XIX, p.75.)
Again:
... Many religiously believed in the purity of the aims of the Allies; but now all this has been exposed, and everybody can see that the notorious Allies, who have dictated terms to Germany even more monstrous than those of the Brest-Litovsk Peace, are robbers no less than the German imperialists. (Loc. cit., vol.XXIII, pp.303-4. English Edition.)
And again:
But what do we find the Wilsons doing to defeated Germany? See what a picture of world relations is unfolding before our eyes! This picture, from which we get our idea of what the Wilson gentry are offering their friends, is a million and a trillion times more convincing. What we are arguing over, the Wilsons would settle in a trice. These gentry – the free billionaires, the most humane people in the world – would wean their friends in a trice even of thinking, let alone talking of “independence” of any sort. (Idem, p.442.)
And again:
Until now the petty bourgeoisie hoped that the British, French and Americans stood for real democracy; until now it still cherished that illusion; but now that illusion is being completely dispelled by the peace that is being imposed on Austria and Germany. The British are behaving as if they had made it their special purpose to prove the correctness of the Bolshevik views on international imperialism. The British, French and Americans are behaving as if they made it their purpose to prove that the Bolsheviks were right. (Idem, p.329.)
And again:
And now history, with the malicious irony characteristic of it, has brought it about that, after German imperialism, it is now the turn of Anglo-French imperialism to expose itself, and it is doing it thoroughly. And we declare to the Russian, German and Austrian working class masses: “These are not the Russian serf troops of 1848! They are going to crush a people which is about to liberate itself from capitalism – to strangle a revolution.” And we say with absolute confidence that this gorged beast will meet its doom, just as did the beast of German imperialism. (Idem, pp.282-3.)
Any number of similar quotations from Lenin and Trotsky can be cited. But there is one fact that is worth a whole library of, quotations, namely: in Lenin’s lifetime, the fight against Versailles, especially in the victor countries, was placed at the head of the political agenda of the Communist International. Thus the French Communist Party placed “the fight against the Versailles Treaty in the foreground of our tasks” as one of its spokesmen wrote at the time, and then went on to add:
It lays upon us the duty of strengthening by word of mouth and by aid of the press the feeling of solidarity binding the workers of France to the workers of Germany. (Inprecorr, 1923, Vol.VI, p.53.)
Today the Stalinists in France, England, the U.S. and elsewhere express their solidarity not with the German workers but with the French and Allied Imperialists and, in return, demand slave labor from Germany. One must be either blind or hypnotized to accept this, in good faith, as – ”Leninism”!
Neither Lenin nor Trotsky based their revolutionary optimism solely on the break in mass-moods, following the war and the Peace of Versailles, crucial as this subjective factor is. They also took into account the objective foundation of the revolution, namely: the ruination and disintegration of the economic (and political) system of capitalism. “The victory of the Entente and the Versailles Peace have not halted the process of economic ruination – and decay but have only altered its paths and forms.” (Trotsky).
And, moreover, there are additional important considerations:
The war, through the Versailles Treaty, has imposed such conditions upon the advanced peoples that they now find themselves in a position of colonial dependency, poverty-stricken, famished, ruined and deprived of all rights. Because they have been bound hand and foot by the Treaty and placed by it for many generations to come under conditions such as no civilized people have ever had to live. There you have a picture of the world: Immediately following the war, not less than a billion and a quarter of the world population remains subject to colonial bondage, and must submit to the bestial exploitation of capitalism which has boasted so much of its peace-loving nature. Some fifty years ago, there was some justification for this boast, that is, before the earth was already divided, before the monopolies established their rule, at a time when capitalism was still able to develop in relative peace and without plunging into colossal military conflicts. But today, in the wake of this epoch of peace, there has taken place a monstrous intensification of oppression; there is to be observed a regression toward colonial and military bondage worse than any hitherto. The Versailles Peace has placed Germany and a whole number of defeated states in conditions which make economic existence impossible – conditions that deprive them of all rights and plunge them into degradation.
The foregoing citation is from a three-hour opening speech delivered by Lenin to the Second World Congress of the Comintern (Loc. cit., vol.XXV, pp.332-3). The economic chaos, aggravated by Versailles, was so critical that the English economist Keynes called Europe a “madhouse.” Lenin used Keynes’ volume The Economic Consequences of the Peace to illustrate, at the Second World Congress, his own views on imperialism and the impasse into which it had driven mankind: “Economically Germany cannot exist after the Versailles Peace, and not only Germany, but all of the defeated countries.” (Idem, p.507).
This was likewise acknowledged by Keynes, the same gentleman who today unhesitatingly underwrites wilder and more destructive schemes for Germany and all of the world.
The economic consequences of Versailles which brought only calamities to the European continent, was summed up by the Bolsheviks as having “dismembered, tortured, Balkanized all of Europe” (Lenin); “while the Balkan peninsula is being barbarized, Europe is becoming Balkanized” (Trotsky).
And further:
... And indeed from the standpoint of economic development this entire particularism of tiny states (set up by Versailles) with their shut-inness, their tariff systems and so on, represent a monstrous anachronism, an insane implantation of medievalist into the twentieth century (Trotsky).
By the Versailles Peace they have created a financial system of which they are themselves unable to make either head or tail (Lenin, Op. cit., vol.XXVII, p.346).
German technology and the high productivity of German labor, these most important factors in the regeneration of world economy, are being ever more paralyzed after the Versailles Peace than was the case in wartime. The Entente is faced with insolvable contradictions. In order to exact payment, one must provide the possibility of work. In order to make work possible one must make it possible to live. And giving crushed, dismembered, exhausted Germany the possibility to live means – to make it possible for her to resist (Trotsky).
In the interval between the two world wars, Versailles and the League of Nations secured anything but peace. In the space of 21 years, almost a score of wars were fought, as a prelude to the second world collision. In place of peace Versailles brought growth to militarism, one of the biggest obstacles in the way of economic progress. As for the “peace” brought by San Francisco, its sessions were accompanied by the beating of the war drums. Failing the revolution, militarism will continue its fearful growth.
What has changed since Lenin and Trotsky made their foregoing analyses? Every single one of the conditions cited and analyzed by them has been aggravated. Europe under the League of Nations seems almost like good times compared with Europe under the “United Nations” charter.
“But what about the United States?” Precisely this same cry was raised after the war of 1914-1918. The French bourgeoisie was then the loudest booster of America’s humanitarian future.
Here is what Trotsky wrote at that time:
But what about the United States? “America is the hope of humanity!” Through the lips of Millerand, the French bourgeois repeats this phrase of Turgot in the hope of having his own debts remitted, although he himself never remits anyone’s debts. But the United States is incapable of leading Europe out of its economic blind alley. America’s incapacity, to say nothing of her utter lack of desire, to succor Europe was manifested almost three decades ago, when America, during and after World War 1, not only preserved but actually expanded her economic apparatus, in large measure at the expense of the imperialist rivals, whether allies or enemies. Today, the United States emerges not richer but much poorer than it entered the Second World War. The whole world has been wrecked and impoverished. Not only does the United States still remain incapable of leading Europe out of her economic blind alley, but it is making all the necessary plans to prevent the European peoples from rising to their feet again.
 
Revolutionary Horizon
From the crisis of the war and the crisis of the liquidation period of the war, Lenin and Trotsky drew the most direct revolutionary conclusions. Lenin was of the opinion that Versailles must lead to revolutionary upheavals:
The Entente powers have overstepped the bounds of the possible for bourgeois policy; they have overdone it, just as the German imperialists overdid it in February and March 1918 in concluding the Brest Peace. The cause that led to the collapse of German imperialism is again clearly perceptible in the case of Anglo-French imperialism. The latter have imposed peace terms on Germany that are far worse, far more onerous than those which Germany imposed on us when concluding the Brest Peace. In doing so, Anglo-French imperialism has overstepped the bounds and this will later prove fatal to them. Once beyond these bounds imperialism forfeits the hope of holding the laboring masses in obedience. (Loc. cit., vol. XXIII, p. 470. English Edition.)
Again:
Tens of millions of corpses and cripples left by the war – a war to decide whether the English or German group of financial bandits would obtain the greater share of the loot, and on top of al this, the two peace treaties (Brest and Versailles) are opening at an unprecedented speed the eyes of millions and tens of millions of those whom the bourgeoisie grinds down, crushes, deceives and dupes. (Loc. cit., vol.XIX, p.75.)
For his part, Trotsky analyzed the situation in exactly the same way:
Today the one and only issue is: Who shall henceforth be the bearer of state-ized production – the imperialist state or the state of the victorious proletariat? In other words: Is all toiling mankind to become the bond slaves of the victorious world cliques who, under the firm name of the “League of Nations” and aided by an “international” army and an “international” navy, will here plunder and strangle some peoples and there cast crumbs to others, while everywhere and always shackling the proletariat – with the sole ‘object of maintaining their own rule? Or shall the working class of Europe and of the advanced countries in other parts of the world take in hand the disrupted and ruined economy in order to assure its regeneration upon socialist principles. It is possible to shorten the epoch of crisis through which we are passing only by measures of the proletarian dictatorship which does not look back to the past, which respects neither inherited privileges nor property rights, which takes as its starting point the need of saving the starving masses.
For all these reasons, Lenin’s conclusion was:
Everybody knows that the social revolution is maturing in Western Europe not by the day but by the hour; that the same thing is taking place in America and in England – these alleged representatives of culture and civilization, and these victors over the Hun-the German imperialists. (Loc. cit., Vol.XXIV, pp.545-6.)
The social revolution did come in Western Europe but it ran up against the betrayal of the official leadership of the labor movement – the Socialist parties of the Second International – and the immaturity of the Communist parties of the Third International.
This time, the bourgeoisie has passed far beyond the bounds it transgressed in 1918-1919. Nowhere in Europe can the workers be kept docile. The revolutionary process which began in the period following World War I is clearly to be discerned today both in England and in America. The English workers have shown what their real temper and aspirations are by crushing the Tory government at the polls. But the same internal enemies – the labor agents of imperialism – still obstruct the road. The old generation of renegade “Socialists” have been re-enforced by a new generation of renegade “Communists” (the Stalinists). On the other hand, the necessary instrument of the revolution – the World Party of the Socialist Revolution, The Fourth international – has been forged well in advance of the war, and not during its aftermath as was unavoidably the case with Lenin’s Comintern.
With the League of Nations, in Lenin’s opinion, the bourgeoisie began “digging its own grave.” With the “United Nations” charter, our entire civilization will be dragged into the abyss, unless the workers succeed in providing the long overdue burial for the brutalized, blood-crazed brigands of imperialism.
 
Footnote
1. Unless otherwise specified in the text, all citations from Trotsky are from his book, The First Five Years of the Communist International, scheduled for publication in September by Pioneer Publishers; the citations from Lenin are translated by the writer from the Third Russian Edition of Lenin’s Collected Works.


 The Consumer Price Index for May 1953 shows that living costs have remained near the all-time post-Korea peak. This appears incomprehensible in the face of the declines in wholesale prices and many commodities. The capitalist press gives all sorts of explanations, except the true ones, for the continued high prices. The favorite dodge is to blame it on high wages. High profits are, of course, never mentioned in this connection.
Above all, the capitalist apologists refrain from mentioning the major factor which is fueling the continuing inflation. This is the arms program of American imperialism with the government deficit spending it entails; and the accompanying credit inflation without which this arms program could not have been financed. This aspect of our economy has yet to receive the attention it deserves, although it is pregnant with grave disorders and dangers.
There is a relation between .high prices and credit inflation, which happens to be a special process whereby the dollar is being depreciated. Let us explain.
It is not hard to grasp how debasement of currency leads to rising prices. A government resorts directly to the printing press and, say, doubles or triples the currency in circulation. The new currency emissions, thrown into the market, cause prices to double or treble. However, there has been no striking rise in US circulating currency. Since Korea there has been less than a 10% increase, from $27.7 billion in 1950 to $29.2 billion in 1951; and the money in circulation since that time has remained relatively stable.
It is not so easy to grasp how an inflationary process can occur and the dollar tend to be depreciated without a notable expansion of paper currency. That is because it is not commonly known that paper currency is only part of the money supply in this country; and by no means the biggest part. As a matter of fact, paper currency is used for comparatively small transactions.
As every banker knows, by far the greater bulk of payments is made through the deposit and check system. This system is colossal. Less than one year after Korea, in 1951, annual check payments for the first time passed the two-trillion mark and have since remained at this record level! This single fact suffices to show that bank deposits and checks constitute the principal circulating money in this country.
Let us look a little closer at what actually takes place in the banking system, this nerve center of the entire capitalist system. Bank deposits against which checks may be drawn are of two distinct types. First, there are the normal deposits of capitalists and other individuals from every layer of the population. When bankers advance loans against such deposits they activate otherwise idle capital or make available to the capitalists, through loans, the money income of all the classes. Through such loans bankers do not significantly increase the existing money supply, but simply set it in motion, utilize it more fully and efficiently.
Second, there is an entirely different type of deposit. These are made by bankers’ loans, based exclusively on an expansion of bank credit. In such cases the banks actually throw new money into the existing supply. These are credit-dollars, as distinguished from legal tender. The original borrower issues checks against this banker’s loan. His checks are then deposited in other banks by the respective recipients who likewise draw against these deposits. A circuit of a special type thus arises. It may be set down as a kind of law that every general increase of bank loans results in a general increase of bank deposits, and by this token increases the total money supply.
Periodically the capitalist press trumpets to the world another jump in bank deposits. It is hailed as another sign of how strong the US economy is. In reality, as we shall presently see, it is symptomatic of the entire inflationary process.   
Paper Money and Credit Money The question naturally arises: Why doesn’t this new money exert the same pressure on purchasing power as would emissions of paper currency? The explanation is that paper currency circulates in a different way from credit-dollars. New paper emissions flow directly into the market; credit-dollars, on the contrary, circulate primarily among the capitalists themselves. The channels into which credit-dollars flow depend on the decisions of the capitalists. The bankers exercise a measure of control. But the final destination of these funds is determined by where the most profit is to be gained.
If the commodity markets offer lush prospects for gain, billions flow in that direction, as happened in the period immediately after Korea. If the prospects are not so bright in these markets, the funds flow elsewhere. The bulk of them has, in fact, gone to finance the arms program, meet the annual government deficits, maintain huge inventories, feed the state, local and private debts. The inflationary effects of credit expansion thus take place indirectly, and in a masked way.
The last time the American people had experience with credit inflation was during the fabulous Twenties. This credit inflation took place on the basis of influx of gold into the US. Each time a bank added one dollar in gold reserves, it was able to extend some $13 of new credit. These credit-dollars did not flow at the time into commodity markets but primarily into stock-market speculation and real-estate promotions. Behind the 1929 Wall Street crash was the doubling of loans to brokers and dealers—from $3.2 billion (on Oct. 5, 1927) to $6.8 billion (on Oct. 2, 1929). When the banks, spurred by economic realities and the need for self-preservation, instead of extending further loans, started calling their loans in, the speculative bubble burst, bringing the whole economy down with it.
The driving force behind the present-day credit inflation, particularly since Korea, is the need to finance the militarization program, and “service” the astronomic federal debt. The banks are not the only ones participating in this inflationary process. The US Treasury plays a leading role.
Side by side with the paper money it issues regularly, the Treasury also issues another type of money, credit-money, or credit-dollars. Like the ordinary paper currency these credit-dollars also come rolling off the printing presses in the shape of Treasury notes, bills, bonds, certificates of indebtedness and the like.
New emissions take place each time the government confronts, as it annually does, a deficit budget and must therefore borrow. And each time new billions of credit-dollars are added to the money supply. This fiscal year, for example, “the government expected to wind up ... about $8.5 billion ‘in the red’.” (Associated Press dispatch from Washington, June 27, 1953.) Four days later, on July 1, the deficit was announced as $9.3 billion. [2*] This is about $3 billion more “in the red” than the Eisenhower administration originally expected. The administration likewise refrained from informing the public that this whopping deficit is actually illegal, because it brings the total federal debt above the statutory limit. (According to Federal Reserve figures the US debt in January and February of this year passed the $267 billion mark; new borrowings of $9.3 billion would top the legal limit of $275 billion.) Workers ought to learn that when the government peddles war bonds, it is actually selling them credit-money. Each time a worker buys a war bond, credit-money is converted into ringing coin—by the US Treasury, that is. Every capitalist agency and spokesman tells the workers it is a sound buy. Is it? On the record, the claim is a dubious one. Purchasers of wartime bonds who cashed them in the post-war period received depreciated dollars in return, losing heavily in the transaction. Why? Because in addition to sound credit-money there happens to be such a thing as inflated credit-money, which tends to depreciate with each new emission. This tendency is beginning to shape up quite clearly.   
Are There Limits to Volume of Credit? What are the limits beyond which emissions of credit-money become dangerous? Under the rule of the monopolists, no one is permitted to know. The authorities in power consult some financial wizards who take a deep breath and make a guess. One such guess of $275 billion originally fixed the statutory limit of the US federal debt. Under certain conditions, this may work out fine. Under different conditions, not so fine. It is a fact that even before the Eisenhower administration found itself compelled to borrow beyond the legal $275 billion limit, the value of US credit-dollars already started skidding.
One sign of this is that the government has found it necessary to offer its bonds, notes, certificates, etc., at cheaper rates, that is, it must offer higher interest rates now.
The rate of depreciation is still relatively gradual. But it is already significant. At the start of 1946 the average annual interest charge on the national debt was below two percent (1.97%). By the end of October 1951 it rose to 2.31%. By May 1952 the US Treasury was paying rates of up to 2.75%. The National City Bank of NY estimated at the time that “the actual cost of money raised on the [May 1952 Treasury] transaction may approach 3.5%.” In its recent new bond issue the Treasury hiked the interest rate to 3.25%. It is safe to conclude that the carrying charges on the national debt are heading for the estimate of 3.5% made in June 1952 by the National City Bank.
These decimal points may seem unimportant. But they gain considerably in meaning if, it is borne in mind that each percentage point, every 1%, today represents an annual carrying charge of $2.75 billion on the federal debt, already past its statutory limit, and heading higher.
What is more, as the government pays higher rates; all interest rates go up. Higher rates must be paid on state, local and private indebtedness. These higher carrying charges for federal, state and local debts; for business and farm loans; for plant and home mortgages; for credit and instalment buying and other types of loans, can come only out of the annual national income, already staggering under the intolerable load, of expense for the arms program. An increased portion of national income must thus be diverted annually merely to cover interest on debts, past, present and projected. This, too, becomes a new factor tending to push up prices and bite into living standards.   
National Debt and Inflation The capitalist ruling circles are not unaware that the federal debt is a major factor feeding the inflationary process. To cite only one instance, there is the report of The American Assembly which met at Columbia University in May 1952 under Eisenhower’s personal auspices. This eminent body concluded unanimously “that the large outstanding public debt is a powerful inflationary force.” The bigger it grows, the more powerful it becomes. And it has been growing!
The already cited Associated Press dispatch, which reported the highest post-war deficit for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1953, also reported an officially “estimated $5.6 billion deficit” for next year “if President Eisenhower’s tax program is approved by Congress ...” If Congress does not approve, the deficit will be bigger.
The size of yearly deficits is not the only problem facing Washington. The volume of maturing issues poses likewise the problem of refunding the debt. From May of last year, for a period of 11 months, the Treasury had the financial headache of refunding notes and bonds amounting to 46.3 billion dollars. This year the refunding headache is proportionately bigger. As of June 15, 1953 and for the next 12 months there will mature Treasury bonds, certificates of indebtedness, bills and notes to the amount of $75,507,996,000. They are as follows:
    The Treasury’s Refunding Headache This Year
    Date
  Issue
  Amount (in millions of $)
    June 15, 1953
  1953 2% bonds
       277.600
    June 18
  Discount bills
    1,200.500
    June 19
  Tax anticipation bills
    2,002.666
    June 25
  Discount bills
    1,200.652
    July 1
  1.4% sav. notes Ser. D
       127.626
         "
  Ser. E sav. bonds
    4,850.043
         "
  Ser. F sav. bonds
       155.615
         "
  Ser. G sav. bonds
       498.297
    July 2
  Discount bills
    1,200.547
    July 9
          "        "
    1,400.812
    July 16
          "        "
    1,400.736
    July 23
          "        "
    1,500.526
    July 30
          "        "
    1,499.924
    Aug. 6
          "        "
    1,500.380
    Aug. 13
          "        "
    1,500.569
    Aug. 15
  2% ctfs. of ind.
    2,881.576
    Aug. 20
  Discount bills
    1,501.213
    Aug. 27
          "        "
    1,500.777
    Sept. 3
          "        "
    1,500.701
    Sept. 10
          "        "
    1,400.368
    Sept. 15
  2% bonds
    7,986.245
    Sept. 18
  Tax anticipation bills
       800.064
    Dec. 1
  1-21/8  Treas. notes
  10,541.667
    Jan. 1, 1954
  1.4% sav. notes Ser. D
         54.512
            "
  Ser. E sav. bonds
    5,594.356
            "
  Ser. G sav. bonds
    1,736.573
            "
  Ser. F sav. bonds
       466.631
    Feb. 15
  2¼% ctfs. of ind.
    8,114.165
    Mar. 15
  13/8% Treas. notes
    4,675.068
    May 1
  Ser. A sav. notes
    1,647.587
    June 1
  25/8% ctfs. of ind.
    4,790.000
     
  Total
  75,507.996
    If to this total of $75.5 billion we add the $9.3 billion needed in cash to cover this year’s deficit, the grand total of $84.8 billion must be raised by June 1, 1954. No small undertaking even for the American imperialist colossus. When so many billions are needed, it is imperative to resort to the banks.
Here we come to the part that the monopolist bankers play in the credit inflation. And their role is the key one, overshadowing the Treasury’s emissions of new credit-money.   
The Government and the Banks The government borrows from the banks. It is a bookkeeping transaction in essence. The banks simply open a deposit for the government on their books, receiving in return government IOU’s. But the pay-off is that these IOU’s are not then simply filed away as promises to pay at some future date. On the contrary, they fall into a special category. They constitute legal RESERVES for the banks. And against this “government collateral” the banks are empowered to issue further loans.
This is a high-handed practice even for the field of high finance, and we don’t ask the reader to take our word for it. We yield the floor to an authority on the subject, Senator Douglas of Illinois, and let him explain these operations in detail:
“Most of us who have not had the time to go into the subject suppose that the banker later lends to other people the money that we deposit in his bank ... But it is not true of commercial banking or the banking system as a whole. The real fact, which is so little understood even among bankers, is that the banking system creates money. It does not do it by having printing presses in the windows of hanks where we can see the $1, $5 and $10 bills turned out by the bale, but banks as a group do it just as effectively by making their loans to borrowers, for when they make these loans they credit the borrower with a deposit account against which the person or company which has borrowed can write checks. Indeed, nearly all the business in this Nation is carried on through bank checks, and the deposits in our banks constitute the overwhelming bulk of our money supply.” (Congressional Record, Feb. 22, 1951, page 1520.)
In the foregoing words, the Senator has given a pretty accurate description of the process of credit inflation and the role banks play in it. The banks, however, do not “create” new money as Douglas devoutly claims. The history of capitalism is replete with similar acts of creation. For example, it used to be the practice among dairymen to “create” milk by diluting the produce of cows with tap water, chalk and other adulterants. It is a rare banker who doesn’t know better than Douglas just what is involved in the process of “creating” new money. Even the NY Times’ editors know better. In a moment of candor, on June 4, 1953, they declared:
“The crude way is simply to turn on the printing presses and manufacture currency. The modern, refined way is to borrow through the banks. Both in the end come down to the same thing ...”
And for a change, they tell the unvarnished truth.   
Inflation by Law Now listen to the Senator expound the basis on which this inflationary process is permitted, by law, to take place.
“Still greater obscurity,” complained the Senator, “surrounds the subject of bank reserves and the relation of reserves to the creation of deposit [read: credit] money ... It is important, however, to know that the main source of the banking system’s ability to extend credit and thereby create money comes from these reserves. Banks acquire their reserves in two ways:
“Either by borrowing from the Federal Reserve against commercial paper or paper collateraled by government bonds or through the purchase of government securities by the Federal Reserve in the open market—whether these securities are sold by the banks themselves or by non-bank sellers. For various reasons, borrowing by member banks from Federal Reserve banks on commercial paper is not very important now, although that was thought to be the original purpose of the Federal Reserve System, and in recent years the rediscount of member bank paper by the Federal Reserve banks has never amounted to more than a few hundred million dollars at one time. Reserves within the Federal Reserve System today are, therefore, overwhelmingly created—indeed, about 99-percent created—by Federal Reserve purchases of government securities in the open market.
“Now, we come to a vital point: Upon each dollar of the reserves of the member banks of the Reserve System, the banks can make approximately $6 of loans, and hence can create that amount of credit.” (Same source, pp.1520-1521.)
These statements were made on the Senate floor more than five years ago. No banking authority challenged them then, or since. If not “99 percent,” then assuredly the overwhelming bulk of US banking reserves consists of government IOU’s which, in turn, to use the Senator’s terminology, become “the main source” of the banking system’s “ability to create money from these reserves.” In other words, the Treasury issues credit-money; the banks monetize it, and then on the basis of this same credit-money they issue still more credit-money, at the rate of up to six-to-one.
For the banks it’s a veritable gold mine. They collect interest and fees for every dollar loaned to the government; and, then on top of it, they are enabled to collect interest and fees for six times as many dollars. Small wonder that the banks prefer to surround with “obscurity” the subject of reserves.   
Credit Money Since Korea How much credit-money have the bankers thrown into the money supply since Korea? With documents and figures in hand, Sen. Douglas proved that by early 1951 not less than $10 billion were extended by banks to speculators in the commodity markets.
“It may be said also,” added the Senator, “that a recent Federal Reserve survey shows that three-fifths of the expansion of business loans [since Korea] went to commodity dealers and to processors, with loans to cotton dealers predominating.” (Same source, p.1519.)
These billions used for the 1950-51 speculative orgy are only a part of the total volume of credit-money made available by the banks. Other billions, by the score, have gone to finance the sharp increases in state and local indebtedness and, generally, for business, farm and personal loans. As a result the entire debt structure, public and private, is already top-heavy.
The Institute of Life Insurance is a high authority on statistics relating to the growth of public and private debt. In February of last year this Institute reported that “for the six-year period ended with 1951, personal debts showed a record climb of over 55 billions.” That’s not the total private debt, only the increase over a six-year period. In the single year of 1951 personal debts rose by $8 billion. The American “island of prosperity” was obviously proving quite expensive and, as of two years ago, was carrying a rather heavy mortgage. According to the same report, individual holdings of liquid assets increased by only about $23 billion while “the people as a whole expanded their debts more than twice as fast as their cash assets since the end of World War II.”
On June 22 of this year the Institute of Life Insurance issued an even more somber report. The gross public and private debt jumped about “40 billion in 1952 to a record high of roughly $640 billion,” and “it still is going up all along the line.” The biggest expansion has taken place in private debt. Business and individuals combined more than doubled their borrowings since 1945, their indebtedness rising from $155 billion in 1945 “to an estimated $330 billion at the end of last year (1952).”
More than half of this increase of $175 billion was accounted for by borrowings of private individuals, whose debts have risen from $55½ billion in 1945 “to about $137 billion at the end of last year,” or by $81½ billion in a seven-year interval. This is an average annual rise of $11½ billion. The Institute said “home mortgage debt and consumer credit were the major factors in this increase,” and, in fact, “led the debt increase in the rate of expansion in the period.” Needless to say, the banks have financed all this.   
Increase in Tax Burden This total debt is more than double the national income. No other capitalist system has witnessed anything approximating such a staggering debt load. In one of his flights of demagogy Truman, during his tenure in the White House, predicted an “average income” of $4,000 yearly for every American family. This “prediction” has been realized in reverse under Eisenhower. The existing volume of debt amounts to $4,000 for every woman, man and child in the United States. Assuming an average interest of 3½%, it means a load of $560 a year for an average family of four, merely to cover the carrying charges on this debt.
Parallel with the rise in the federal, state and local indebtedness a profound change has taken place in US tax structure. It, too, has been Europeanized at a break-neck pace. Taxes, federal, state and local in 1951, totalled $84 billion, talking roughly one dollar out of every three of the national income. Since then the tax burden has not decreased but increased. The Eisenhower administration, along with most state and local officials, is pressing for new taxes.
In any case, the existing taxes represent an unparalleled peacetime burden. Europeans are accustomed to it; to Americans it comes as a new experience. They obviously do not like it, nor its impact on their living standards.
There is a connection between taxes and the volume of public debt; taxes grow as the debt increases. But there is also a connection between taxes and prices. This is not commonly understood because the tie-in is largely a hidden one. But it is important nonetheless. In the general price structure, particularly that of food and other necessities, hidden taxes tend to constitute a steadily increasing proportion. For example, by 1952 there were 201 direct and hidden taxes on a gallon of gasoline; 189 taxes on a suit of clothes; 154 on a bar of soap; 53 on a loaf of bread, and so on. In many states the bulk of tax revenues comes from sales and excise taxes. In states like Ohio, Taft’s stamping ground, more than 75% of all Ohio tax revenues comes from this source.
The National Association of Manufacturers has pressed for years for a federal sales tax. They want it to yield as much as $20 billion a year. From all indications, the Eisenhower adminstration is pushing for “some form” of a general sales tax. Among its other more obvious features, such a tax would constitute a sharp inflationary measure, because it would automatically drive up all prices.
Deficit government spending, swollen debts, stiff taxes, cumulative depreciation of the credit-dollar—these are the direct consequences of the imperialist arms program. Ultimately these developments threaten to undermine the entire fiscal structure of the country.
The Institute of Life Insurance has appealed “for caution.” But what weight do such appeals have in the face of the hard fact that there is no way of financing the arms program except through further credit inflation.
The Eisenhower administration is unquestionably a “sound money” combination. The big bankers were among his foremost backers and they were the bitterest opponents of Truman’s “easy money” policies. They fought out in 1952 with the Truman administration, before Eisenhower’s victory, the issue of who would dictate the credit policies in the country, the bankers or the US Treasury. Truman capitulated to them. Interest rates were sharply hiked, presumably to “tighten up” the money supply. The Keynesian apostles of cheap and easy government-created credit, with Keyserling at the head, have been booted out of the President’s Economic Council. Eisenhower’s new chief economic adviser Dr. A.F. Burns is anti-Keynes and has warned against “unsound booms.”
But economic realities are proving stronger than wishes. Ironically enough, the big bankers, Eisenhower, his chief economic adviser, his Treasury staff and the rest of the crew find themselves compelled to follow the self-same policies as under Truman. The Federal Reserve has reduced the reserve requirements of member banks by approximately $1.1 billion. Paul Heffernan, financial writer of the NY Times, explained on June 28, that this “will increase the lending power of the banks by about $5.7 billion,” that is, pretty close to the six-to-one ratio.
The Eisenhower officials do not even bother to deny that thereby new, strong inflationary pressures will be generated. The administration has merely issued assurances that it “would try to manage its borrowing so as to minimize inflationary effects” (NY Times, June 27, 1953).
The only alternative to continued credit-inflation is to drastically cut back the militarization program. The US imperialists reject such a course, for they know it spells an economic crash. A disrupted fiscal system is “a calculated risk” they prefer to take at this stage.
Credit-inflation, already unparalleled in its proportions, has thus been given another boost. Hikes in steel prices provide a still further impetus to inflation. The mass of the people will have to pay for this by stiffer taxes, by a lower real “take home” pay, by new blows at their living standards. We are still in the initial stages of these extremely expensive transactions for the American people which all stem from the arms program, and the accompanying credit inflation.
 
Notes by ETOL 1*. This issue is of Fourth International is dated March-April 1953,but it is obvious from the contents of the issue, as well as of this article, that the actual publication date was considerably later since documents are referred to which were not published until later in the year and events are mentioned, e.g. the East German Workers’ Uprising of mid-June, which had not yet happened in March or April. This makes it difficult to place a more precise date on this document.
2*. In the printed version it says “million”, but from the context it is clear that this should be “billion”.



Growing economic difficulties of American capitalism are focusing attention upon that school of liberal economists who claim to have diagnosed the causes and discovered a painless cure for the ailments of capitalism. Prominent public figures head this influential trend of economic thought which draws its principal ideas and inspiration from the work of the late Sir John Maynard Keynes, English economist and former director of the Bank of England. Three Keynesian convert’s, Edwin G. Nourse, Leon H. Keyserling and John D. Clark, comprise the President’s Economic Council. In his major pronouncements and actions on economic matters, Truman has largely relied upon the analysis and advice of these men.
Along with a lengthy list of professors and a few liberal Democratic politicians like Chester Bowles, governor of Connecticut, top union officials like Walter Reuther, Dubinsky and others draft upon the Keynesians for arguments and rationalization for their policies in the labor movement. From Truman to the union bureaucracy, this grouping has been noisily promoting a newfangled, depression-proof capitalism under such labels as “welfare state,” “regulated economy” or “mixed economy.”
Saving American Capitalism, a compendium of articles by 25 different writers, ranging over a wide variety of topics, is a representative product of this school. (Saving American Capitalism, edited by Prof. Seymour E. Harris, Knopf, New York, 1948. All quotations not otherwise indicated are from this book.) The authors are primarily moved, not by any alleged discoveries in economic theory, but by fear of another major collapse of American economy and by concern over the people s reaction, to such a depression. This is frankly admitted by Chester. Bowles:
“The conviction that we cannot again accept a major depression -is not a mere, theory. It is a fact which will have a profound effect on our economic future. I have ,been face to face with it in every section of America. Today, our people -are determined that we must not and cannot accept the economic waste and heartbreak that go hand in hand with depression; and with this, new conviction, for better or for worse, goes the knowledge that, if our private-enterprise, system fails, other alternatives are possible.” (p.17)
This expresses a changed attitude on the part of self-avowed champions of. capitalism. Not long ago, no defender of “free enterprise” would admit that crises were anything more than growing pains, annoying but quite in the nature, of things, and even beneficial. Crises used to be discounted as incidental “overhead expenditures.” With time, they explained, crises would tend to grow milder and eventually disappear as capitalism approached perfection.
 
The Specter of Depression
The mass revulsion against economic catastrophes of capitalism has compelled these American followers of Keynes to discard the old doctrine of predestined harmony” and automatic progress. The advocates of a “welfare state” recognize the profound and lasting impact of the crisis “of the Thirties on the American people who will not passively await and accept the disastrous consequences of a new depression. They are no less troubled by the damage a new collapse would inflict upon the entire structure of world capitalism.
“Unless we perform surgery on our economic system, it will not survive,” says Prof. Seymour E. Harris of Harvard. (p.4). All of the 25 authors are of course opposed to “surgery” that would remove capitalism itself, the central source of disease. What they want are safe-and-sane operations which will eliminate crises. That’s the point of all their talk of “regulating the economy,” “stabilizing demand,” “adjusting monetary policy,” etc.
We do not intend to follow these “unorthodox” saviors of capitalism through their many variations and disagreements. We propose to examine the more important basic tenets on which they by and large agree. They agree that crises can be abolished or at least, by counteracting their worst effects, “leveled off.” They agree that economic life can be so regulated by government intervention and controls that, by manipulating “spending,” demand can be adjusted to levels adequate for keeping the economy on an even keel. Flexible policies governing taxation, credit and the monetary system generally would play a central role in such government intervention. In this article we shall deal only with their doctrine of crises, reserving for later treatment other aspects of their rather elaborate system.
 
The Doctors Disagree
Wendell Berge, who had charge of fruitless anti-trust prosecutions for the Department of justice, believes that monopolies create crises because they destroy free competition.
“When competition is eliminated from a capitalist society, the system is in danger of breaking down. With competition, prices tend to find their fair level, and maximum production and employment result.” (p.203)
If this is so, why did crises erupt long before monopolies appeared on the capitalist scene? Ironically enough, other saviors of capitalism once acclaimed the advent of monopolies as the antidote to the anarchy of free competition in which they saw the main cause of crises.
His colleagues disagree with Berge. Although they are hot for competition, they see nothing wrong in “bigness” as such, provided it is properly “regulated.” But neither Berge nor his dissenters bother to explain just how monopolies can either be removed or effectively regulated under capitalism.
Chester Bowles pegs the whole matter on “the problem of spending and demand.” He restates this basic Keynesian proposition as follows:
“For every dollar’s worth of goods or services, there is created one dollar of potential purchasing power. ... If the level of production is to be maintained and increased all of money must be spent currently by individuals, groups and institutions. Otherwise, our economy will slip into a depression.” (p.20)
Associate Professor Lorie Tarshis of Stanford University uses the very same formula of total spending as a sure-fire cure for depression: He admits, however, that “we cannot expect consumers alone to create the whole of the demand.” The way to get around this obstacle is by increasing “non-consumer spending.”
“In short,” he concludes, “in order to turn depression into prosperity, we must somehow get an increase in total spending or total demand. Perhaps we can operate directly on consumers’ spending; if so, well and good. But if not, we must contrive to increase non-consumer demand – the total spending of firms, governments and foreigners. Failing in that effort, depression continues.” (pp.232-3)
In this entire volume of 367 pages, Prof. Alvin H. Hansen of Harvard is the only other writer who touches directly upon the problem of crises. But he denies what the others affirm. He refuses to be “complacent about the prospect of eliminating the boom-bust cycle by making desirable corrections in the structure of our economy; and it is not true that the correction of structural imbalances will prevent the onward march of the business cycle” (p.221). In Prof. Hansen’s opinion, technological advances by themselves give rise to the biggest disproportions, laying the basis for bigger and better busts. He is frankly pessimistic and appeals for a long-range “cycle policy.” He does not say what this program should be but merely pleads:
“This means a program which can quickly be put into motion, highly flexible and subject to quick adjustment and change. It is this area that we are in danger currently of neglecting.”
It is instructive to note that these healers of capitalism and builders of a “welfare state” begin by sharply differing on what it is they must cure. One says, get rid of the monopolies; others say, keep the monopolies but make sure they are “regulated” and that spending and demand are correctly adjusted; a third wants to achieve this by increasing non-consumer demand; and a fourth fears the effects of technological advances. In their thinking about crises, each singles out some isolated disproportion or set of disproportions generated by capitalism for which each offers one or another nostrum. But none goes to the heart of the problem, i.e., that crises arise from the contradictions of capitalism and the operation of its laws. This fumbling around is in the tradition of the bourgeois economists and politicians who have grappled with the problem of crises in the past – and with no more successful theoretical or practical results.
 
Manipulating the Credit System
For a long time it was believed that dislocations of monetary and credit systems, commonly observed during depressions, were at the bottom of the whole trouble. There followed all sorts of theories on and manipulations with currency emission, bank and credit regulations, etc., including the setting up of government controls, such as the Federal Reserve System.
AH the while, it was overlooked that disturbances of the fiscal structure, stringency of money and credit and panics were primarily the effect and not the cause of convulsions. It was also ignored that crises erupted in times when credit was easy as well as when it was tight.
The organizers of our Federal Reserve System drew heavily on the methods and experience of European countries where similar government fiscal regulations had been applied; but they dismissed off-hand the fact that crises had already engulfed the best as well as the worst tun banking systems. The Federal Reserve System showed .its incapacity to prevent crises in 1921 and again in 1929 although it had been confidently proclaimed in 1914 that the boom and bust cycle had been forever abolished by this fiscal reorganization.
Naturally disproportions in economy are dangerous. But crises cannot be understood exclusively in terms of disproportions as is believed by all capitalist economists, including the Keynesians. They ignore the fact that economic life may be subjected to grave dislocations not only during depressions but also in times of prosperity. Such a threat to US economy today is an imminent collapse of agriculture. The most sanguine believer in a “regulated economy” would concede that another agricultural collapse virtually assures a major depression. Yet the greatest period of peacetime prosperity previously enjoyed in this country unfolded amid the chronic crisis of agriculture in the Twenties. Far from endangering that boom, this grave dislocation actually supplied the basis for eight years of prosperity after 1921, although this chronic farm crisis helped, at a later stage, to undermine the economy.
Or take another set of “maladjustments.” The fast-fading postwar boom evinced throughout highly inflationary tendencies, expressed sharply in the gap between wages and prices. Wages and profits showed an even bigger gap, which has unquestionably served to feed the speculative boom. Yet during the prosperity of the Twenties neither of these two disproportions appeared so pronounced, although profits soared just the same.
The one and the same disparity between wages and prices assumed in the Forties markedly different aspects than it did in the Twenties. So did the second disparity between wages and profits. The main reasons for both disparities in the Twenties came from the great increase in productivity by almost 40%, while wages and prices remained relatively stationary. Prof. Harris evidently ascribes this disproportion to a lapse of memory by the capitalists, for he writes:
“Failing to adhere to competitive principles, business absorbed a large part of the gains of technological progress ... This disproportion between falling costs, on the one hand, and relatively stable wages and prices on the other, was bound to lead to collapse.”
Let us add that the price-wage disparities, which Harris and his friends single out as the prime causes of crises, manifest themselves is chronically in depressions as in periods of upswing.
Let us now return to Mr. Bowles who offers the magic key to crises which reads: “For every dollar’s worth of goods or services there is created one dollar of potential purchasing power,” etc.
If this means anything at all it means that there is some direct connection between expanding production and the expansion of purchasing power. Expand production and you automatically get a more or less harmonious expansion of purchasing power, believes Mr. Bowles. This is a rather pat conclusion, but what resemblance does it bear to the realities of capitalist enterprise?
“Every dollar’s worth of goods or services” is not something mysterious. It is technically known as the gross national product, and the Federal Reserve Board has for years issued quarterly figures on it. Purchasing power, potential or otherwise, is fixed by national income over any given period.
On the other hand the overwhelming majority of purchasers – in the Keynesian lingo, “spenders” – consists of workers and farmers. Every child knows there is more money floating around in prosperity than during depressions. Perhaps it was on the basis of this kindergarten wisdom that Keynes, Bowles, Tarshis and the rest draw the conclusion that there is some direct and even harmonious relation between production and the purchasing power of the masses. Is it really so?
The Keynesians love to cite all sorts of figures relating to production and national income, but they sedulously refrain from comparing and analyzing them in the light of their own contentions. We shall have to take the trouble of doing it for them, much as we dislike to burden our readers with dry statistics.
In the first table are listed the latest available figures for the last three years (1946-48) and for purposes of comparison a typical war year (1944) and a typical depression year (1933).



TABLE I
GROSS NATIONAL OUTPUT AND MASS INCOME
(in billions)
(Source: Federal Reserve Bulletin, Nov. 1948-Apr. 1949)




Year


Gross
National
Product


Farm
Income


Wages
and
Salaries*


Total for
Farmers &
Workers




1933


  55.8


  2.3


  28.8


  31.1




1944


212.2


11.9


114.7


126.6




1946


209.3


14.6


109.7


124.3




1947


231.6


15.6


120.1


135.7




1948


254.9


18.2


132.3


150.5




* Excludes employee payments to social insurance funds.



The income figures listed above are grossly overstated. No deductions are made for taxes. Included under the heading of wages and salaries are payments to military and “government civilian” employees as well as high salaried corporation executives and managerial personnel. On the other hand, giant farm enterprises are lumped together with the farmers. But even these doctored figures cannot hide the real state of affairs.
These columns of billions do show that mass incomes rise and fall quantitatively and absolutely with the expansion and contraction of available “goods and services.” But what is decisive here is how much, of the gross annual output are the workers and farmers able to buy with whatever money they may have in their hands. Are they able to buy more of the increased production as their own funds increase? Are they able to buy as much as they did before? Or less? Let us refer to this second table for the answer.



TABLE II
THE RELATION BETWEEN MASS INCOMES
AND NATIONAL PRODUCTION
(Based on Table I)




Year


Gross National
Product
(in billions)


Farm
Income


Wages and
Salaries
(in percent
of output)


Total




1933


55.8


4.1


51.6


55.7




1944


212.2


5.6


54.0


59.6




1946


209.3


7.0


52.4


59.4




1947


231.6


6.7


51.9


58.6




1948


254.9


7.1


51.9


59.0



Purchasing Power Stationary
It can be seen that farmers in the present postwar period do not stand in the same relation to expanding production as do the workers. From 1944 to 1948 the farmers recorded a sizable gain in the share of total production they could purchase while the share of the workers remained unchanged or declined in the face of sharply expanding production. Worse yet, in 1948, when the national economy passed the quarter of a trillion dollar mark, the relative share of the workers was 51.9%. This relative share does not differ significantly from their position of 51.6% in 1933 when the country was at the bottom of the depression.
Even more shocking is the table’s disclosure that the undeniable recent gains of the farmers have been canceled out by the sag in workers’ purchasing power since 1944. As a consequence the combined purchasing power of the workers and farmers has been stagnating or declining since 1944, despite the sharply increased volume of production!
These comparative figures show that the direct and even harmonious connection which the Keynesians try. to establish between expanding production and the corresponding growth of mass purchasing power does not prevail in real life. The crux of the matter is that under capitalism, with the expansion of production, mass purchasing power tends to stagnate or contract. Fluctuations may at certain times occur, particularly in agriculture, but these are episodic. Temporary gains, as the most recent experience confirms, are swallowed up in the further process of expansion.
Thus the actual connection between production and mass incomes is not direct and harmonious, as is glibly assumed; it is an indirect and highly contradictory one. More important still, their real relation discloses just the opposite tendency to the one claimed by the theoreticians of the “welfare state.”
The disparity between expanding production on the one hand and the stagnating or shrinking ability of the masses to buy on the other, is just as grave as the wage-price disparity which Prof. Harris and others correctly find so calamitous, Or more accurately, both of these disparities flow from one and the same source. That is the grabbing of wealth and national income by the rich. It is not the masses but a tiny minority which invariably absorbs a large part of all gains – those accruing from technological progress from expanding production, as well as from price-gouging.
Despite this, the main disproportions which led to past crises continue to manifest themselves, such as the lag of wages behind prices, the shrinking of mass “spending power” in the face of amplified production, etc. Underlying all these is the cleavage of capitalism into private owners of the productive facilities on the one hand and the mass of the people on the other. So long as this basic antagonism remains, the boom-bust cycle cannot be averted.
When professors like Tarshis echo Keynes by insisting that “we must somehow get an increase in total spending or total demand,” it apparently never enters their heads that they are not saying anything new but simply restating in their own species of jive-talk another chronic problem under capitalism. It is always “somehow” necessary to bring consumption into harmony with production, otherwise the boom-bust cycle recurs. But they ignore the fact that the groundwork for the bust is prepared during the boom, just as the bust “normally” prepares the soil for the next revival.
It is this boom-bust mechanism – and no other – that provides the “somehow” under capitalism in temporarily reestablishing a precarious balance between consumption and production. But the trouble today is that this mechanism of adjustment itself has broken down. As the experience of the Thirties has demonstrated, capitalist has now no way except through war to instil new vigor into its sclerotic organism. (In an article elsewhere in this issue Louis T. Gordon deals with this particular phase.)
 
Consumption and Production
The bankruptcy of Keynesian theoreticians becomes most abject when it comes to dealing with problems of consumption and production. They try to solve these problems, too, by “spending.” Bowles, for example, divides the “groups in our economy” into three, to wit: business, government plus everybody else, “the American people themselves.” How each group spends is really unimportant. How much each has to spend is likewise blithely dismissed. What is really important is that everybody must spend everything:
“Although each of these three groups will change its patterns of expenditures from year to year, the total spent by all three must add up to the]total income earned by everyone in the production of goods and services.” (p.21. Emphasis in the original.)
In the case of an isolated individual one might look upon production and consumption as different aspects of one and the same act. An individual is relatively free to consume more or less harmoniously as his own production rises and falls. But to view society as if it were a single individual or imaginary groups of individuals (Bowles does both) is to misrepresent economic reality.
To begin with, there is once again the decisive fact that the lion’s share of the national income – and therefore of power to consume – invariably falls not into the hands of “all of us,” as Bowles pretends, but into the hands of less than 5% of the population. Tarshis correctly includes this upper crust among the “non-consumers.” The capitalists and their retainers could not possibly spend their entire Share of the national income on themselves even by indulging in the wildest luxuries.
Not Bowles alone but all the Keynesians discuss national income in terms of “annual spending power,” “flow of spending and its determinants,” or “spending groups.” But they never talk in terms of the real and highly contradictory divisions in our society which actually determine the income, and thereby the consuming power, of the various classes. The following table discloses what has been happening in the division of national income while these theorists discuss spending “all of it” – on paper:



TABLE III
THE SHARE OF WORKERS AND FARMERS
IN NATIONAL INCOME
(Same Source)




Year


National
Income
(in billions)


Farm
Income


Wages and
Salaries
(in percent)


Total




1933


  39.6


5.8


72.7


78.5




1944


182.4


6.5


62.9


69.4




1945


179.3


8.1


61.2


69.3




1947


202.5


7.7


59.3


67,0




1948


224.4


8.1


59.0


67.1



The above figures show that the division of national income is weighted just as unfavorably against the bulk of population and in favor of the rich as in the previously examined relation between mass incomes and gross production. Although national income expanded from 1944 to 1948 at a somewhat faster rate than the gross national output (see Table II), the relative share going to workers and farmers did hot rise appreciably in the same interval. On the contrary, it declined from 69.4% in 1944. to 67.1% in 1948, even though the farmers recorded substantial gains during this period. Ironically enough, the table also shows that the masses obtained by far their largest proportional share of the national income – 78.5% – in the depression year 1933! This does not mean that they were better off then than now; it simply serves to underscore the tendency inherent in capitalism for the people’s share of the national income to contract.
The panacea of “total spending” as a means of averting crises not only runs up against the fact that the mass of consumers are rigidly limited in their capacity to spend. It also flies in the face of the fact that, under the most favorable circumstances, consumption must of necessity lag behind production. Reserves are needed for the means of production, for fixed capita], etc. Replacements are required to resume production on a previous scale, let alone expand it. These reserves can, in the last analysis, come only from national income. This unavoidable lag between consumption and production has been understood by many conservative capitalist economists. But not by the “unorthodox” Keynesians.
Far from surpassing, as they believe, the older schools of capitalist economics, these followers of Keynes, the sage of Blobmsbury, relapse into errors long ago refuted by their predecessors. The German economist H.F. Storch, who criticized the French economist J.B. Say on this very point early in the nineteenth century, knew it was false to maintain that the national income can be or must be expended each time, let alone basing any policy on such a proposition.
Why is it impossible for the capitalist system under a “welfare state” or any other, to solve the complex problem of adjusting consumption harmoniously to production?
It cannot be done, in the first place, because production under capitalism is carried on only through its own specific and unchanging forms of distribution. As for consumption, it is determined by production and its dependent distribution.
Distribution is not so simple a matter as the Keynesians picture it. Far more is embraced by distribution than the allotment of goods to customers. Before there is any distribution of goods produced, there in a specific distribution of the means of production. Today the all-important fact is that these means of production are distributed exclusively among private owners and concentrated in monopolist hands. This capitalist type of distribution constitutes one of the internal and insurmountable barriers to achieving any lasting equilibrium between production and consumption. The disciples of Keynes disregard all this. [1]
As for consumption, capitalism here, too, injects its own forms of distribution (interest, profit, etc.) just as pre-capitalist economies, say feudalism, injected into consumption their peculiar distributive forms, (e.g., tithes, rent in kind; etc.). As a consequence, in our society where the means of production are distributed among private owners and where the goods produced are allocated and consumed not in response to social needs but according to the size of pocketbooks, both production and consumption are periodically brought to a standstill whenever “fair” profits are not forthcoming and whenever it becomes difficult to realize these profits in the shape of money-capital. Millions of jobless and hungry – basic producers and consumers – are living evidence of how self-destructive are these capitalist forms of distribution.
As the biggest obstacle of all to a harmonious relationship between production and consumption there is exchange, which, stands, under capitalism, as the intermediary between production arid its dependent distribution on the one hand, and consumption on the other. The planlessness of production finds its crassest expression in the anarchy of the market. Each individual capitalist as well as each giant corporation produces independently of the others for an unknown number of buyers, never knowing whether his products will be found socially useful. Not until his products enter the market can he tell whether his capital will be realized or expanded. The highly complex transactions bound up with this form of exchange are governed by a set of laws which the capitalists themselves must submit to. These laws cannot be changed or controlled by any amount of tinkering
To sum up. Much the same situation prevails in production and consumption as we previously noted in the relation between mass incomes and expanding gross output and in the relative share of the mass of the people in national income. In each instance the needs of the people are subordinated to the narrow interests of a plutocratic minority. Such a setup, as Marx and Engels long ago explained, cannot help but produce disparities, maladjustments and disproportions which culminate in periodic explosions or crises.
The founders of Marxism pointed out that in the sphere of production the tendency of capitalism is toward an absolute expansion of the productive forces without regard for the needs of consumption. At the same time, this absolute tendency to expand collides head on with barriers raised by capitalism itself.
 
Outcome of Blind Development
What the Keynesians are least able to grasp is this self-contradictory and self-destroying nature of capitalism. They try to reason as though “free enterprise” is a rationally conceived and consciously administered mode of economy. They further believe that any of its parts can be repaired and its functions regulated whenever something goes wrong. Capitalism, however, is not like a piece of machinery deliberately designed to meet the needs of society. On the contrary, from its elementary cell-form – the commodity – to its most highly developed form – finance capital – capitalism is the product of blind, instinctive activity carried on for many centuries by human beings. Like Topsy, capitalism “just grew.”
No one thought up the commodity; it came into existence as an extension of direct barter which was itself destroyed by the growth of exchange.
Money was not devised by some ingenious contriver but was likewise produced instinctively, as the sphere of exchange in pre-capitalist societies broadened and deepened and commodities multiplied.
Capital itself grew out of the extension of commerce, first appearing historically in the form of merchants’ capital.
As for the monopolies, no one set out to invent them either; they arose as an unavoidable outgrowth of free competition, completely dominating the latter. But monopolies are powerless to eliminate competition completely, just as competition itself is unable to abolish monopolies.
The outcome of this long historical process is the existing capitalist order with its accumulation of one set of contradictions upon another, one irrationality generating the next. Among the extreme expressions of this irrational state of affairs are – crises.
 
Irrationality of Capitalism
Everyone nowadays senses how paradoxical crises are, even those who are able neither to understand nor to explain them. How staggering indeed is the contrast between our progress in conquering the forces of nature and our seeming impotence ,to avert man-made economic catastrophes!
The Keynesians, taking cognizance of the irrationality of crises, try to “cure” them while leaving all the other irrationalities of capitalism untouched. They seek to straighten out one or another contradiction while preserving the biggest of all contradictions – the capitalist structure.
This enterprise is as absurd in theory as it is hopeless in practice.
The Keynesians find themselves unable to move a step beyond their predecessors in the field of economic theory. Essentially they do no more than paint up the “common-sense” notions of corporation lawyers and capitalist statesmen regarding the existing economic system. Karl Marx long ago solved the secret of how these “common sense notions” were arrived at.
He wrote that
“... the reconciliation of the irrational forms, in which certain economic conditions appear and assert themselves in practice, does not concern the active agents of these [economic] relations in their everyday life. And as they are accustomed to moving about in them, they do not find anything strange about them. A complete contradiction has not the least mystery for them. They are as much at home among the manifestations, which separated from their internal connections and isolated by themselves, seem absurd as a fish in the water.” (Capital, Vol.III, p.905)
Our 25 authors remain so blind not out of stupidity or malice. It is the end-result of their expressed starting point – their “common disposition to save capitalism” – and their complete immersion in the capitalist world around them. This world is made up of contradictory relations and those who accept it are forced to interpret the abysmally irrational as the height of human reason.
 
Footnote
1. What about government control? Can’t this alter the nature and consequences of such a form of distribution of the means of production? Even government-owned industry, as in England, does not basically change such a distribution because the stateized sectors continue to operate for the benefit of private owners. As in privately owned industry, the capitalist claims for compensation, interest payments and the like continue to be the first charge on government-owned industry. It may make considerable difference to an individual capitalist whether he or the government runs a given enterprise, but it makes no significant difference to the capitalist class arid the operation of its economy. Besides, the 25 writers in this book all agree that government intervention must be limited to the minimum. (We leave aside for treatment in another article a detailed discussion of the role and limits of government intervention in economic life.)


 The keystone of the “Welfare State” school of economics is John Maynard Keynes’ “neo-classic” or “unorthodox” theory of money. Keynes, the English economist, set down this theory not in his pretentious 1930 work in two volumes entitled A Treatise on Money, but in his book The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money written in 1936. (All quotations in the text below, unless otherwise indicated, are from this book.)
Keynes starts from the incredible assumption that it is precisely capitalist crises that constitute proof that capitalism is basically a harmonious system of production, capable of infinite expansion of the productive forces, and requiring merely certain reforms, especially in the realm of monetary policy.
According to him, “it is an outstanding characteristic of the economic system in which we live that, whilst it is subject to severe fluctuations in respect of output and employment, it is not violently unstable. Indeed it seems capable of sub-normal activity for a considerable period without any marked tendency either toward recovery or towards complete collapse.” (p.249) This is indeed making a virtue out of necessity! Since capitalism hasn’t and will not collapse automatically and since it was unable to emerge by “normal methods” from the depression of the Thirties therefore it is “not violently unstable,” merely “sub-normal,” and so forth.
This apologist for capitalism then proceeds to conclude that all the troubles of capitalism (its “severe fluctuations”) are in the filial analysis traceable to an antagonism between two forces: on the one side, money-capital and the money rate of interest and on the other, productive capital and its average rate of profit. While calling interest by its name, he prefers to label the average rate of profit  as the “marginal efficiency of capital,” or as “the schedule of the marginal efficiency of capital,” or as “rewards.”
This “revolutionary” theory of money starts its analysis by drawing “a clear distinction” between the money rate of interest at one pole and productive capital and its “rewards” on the other. In this connection Keynes affirms two universal laws:
 That money as such has a more or less stable and intrinsic rate of interest, which tends to stay at a high level, being “relatively reluctant to fall.” That just the opposite is true of “rewards” from productive capital which tend to fall as capital-goods grow more and more abundant..  These ideas are not exactly new.   
From Proudhon to Keynes I propose to show that in his basic approach to money Keynes does not differ substantially from other money reformers who also regarded all the evils of capitalism as emanating from money, the lending of money, the “special privileges” of money and the like. More than a century ago, in France, lending appeared to Proudhon as an evil because lending was not selling. He condemned it as “the faculty of always selling the same article over and over, and receiving its price again and again, without ever relinquishing the ownership of the things one is selling.” (Discussion entre M. F. Bastiat et M. Proudhon, Paris 1850, p.9.)
Proudhon derived the powers of money from its scarcity; money is always in short supply and because of this the private owners of money are always able to exact “unearned tribute” from it. Proudhon proposed to do away with interest and money-lending by simply doing away with money through the medium of “labor notes” and the establishment of “Labor Exchange Banks.” (It was actually tried and, of course, pathetically failed.)
As touches productive capital and the private ownership of the means of production, Proudhon looked upon them as an unadulterated boon. It was all a question of simply making capital goods more and more ple.ntiful. We shall presently see just where Keynes is in accord with Proudhon and wherein he differs.
Is it true that money by its innate nature whether from scarcity or for any other reason has its own rate of interest?
Up to the middle of the eighteenth century, this was a commonly held view. It was exploded by the English economist J. Massie and after him by David Hume. They made the discovery, noteworthy for their time, that interest was nothing more than a certain indefinite portion of profit (surplus-profit) accruing to money-capitalists for lending their funds to industrial or commercial capitalists. It was a division of the surplus social product between the different groups of capitalists.
Part of the mystification of money comes from the fact that it antecedes historically the formation of capital. In pre-capitalist societies money owners shared some of the social surplus with the ruling slave-owners or feudalists. In part, this mystification arises from the fact that neither money nor money-capital itself enters directly into the process of production or into individual consumption. Money remains invariably in the sphere of circulation. Within this sphere, there is a special market, the money market where capital is traded as a peculiar type of commodity. The transactions take place exclusively between the capitalists. Money bears interest because it is advanced as capital to the industrial or commercial capitalists, and for no other reason. Interest expresses the specific form of these transactions between the money capitalists and industrial or commercial capitalists.
There is a maximum limit to interest, namely, the average rate of profit extracted by the entire capitalist class from the process of production. But there is no minimum limit. Within short periods of time, rates of interest can and do fluctuate widely in periods of boom and slump alike.
Customs, legal traditions and a whole set of other accidental factors have as much and more to do with fixing interest rates at any given time than, say, the “scarcity” of money or the “competition” between money-lenders on the one side and borrowers on the other.
In the Keynesian system, not alone money but every durable commodity has an interest-rate in terms of itself. There is, Keynes claims, “a wheat-rate of interest, a copper-rate of interest, a house-rate of interest, even a steel plant-rate of interest.” Unlike money, however, the interest rates of such “durable commodities” may be both positive and negative. The money rate always stays “positive.” This is mere casuistry.   
“Scarcity of Money” The “scarcity” of money is the pet obsession of all money cranks in the history of popular economic delusions. They fix their attention only on the breaking points of the economic conjuncture when capital flees from all other commodities which are falling catastrophically in price, and when the universal cry is for “hard cash” or money, the supplies of which seem to have mysteriously dwindled or even vanished. They ignored altogether other periods, no less characteristic under capitalism, when money supplies appear inexhaustible and funds go begging at low interest rates.
Here Keynes becomes indistinguishable from the run-of-the-mill money cranks. If money, says Keynes in all seriousness, “could be grown like a crop or manufactured like a motor car, depressions would be avoided or mitigated because, if the price of other assets was tending to fall in terms of money, labor would be diverted into the production of money as we see to be the case in gold mining countries ...” (pp.230-1)
Announcing it is “impossible to turn more labor on to producing money when its labor-price rises,” Keynes goes on to conclude that the production (and supply) of money is “completely inelastic.”
All this talk about the “impossibility” of “growing” money like a crop or “manufacturing” it like autos, comes down to the same conclusion that Proudhon and others before and after him have drawn, namely, the whole trouble with money is that it is “scarce.” Keynes prefers to call it “completely inelastic.” What a monumental contribution to the “theory of money”!
Money, explains Keynes, “has an elasticity of substitution equal, or nearly equal to zero; which means that as the exchange value of money rises there is no tendency to substitute some other factor for it.” (p.232) To say the “elasticity of substitution (of money)” is nil or virtually nil is an even more highfalutin way of saying that the supply of money is “completely inelastic” or that money is always in “short supply.” It happens to be untrue.
If anything has characterized modern capitalism, it is its tendency to glut the domestic and world markets not only with “surplus” commodities but also with vast quantities of money-capital. In fact, it is the export of capital and not of commodities that is at the bottom of imperialist rivalry for world markets. There is an over-abundance of capital, and there are fewer and fewer outlets for it.
Keynes chooses to ignore this terrible reality in order all the better to chase his Utopian will-of-the-wisp. But reality catches up with him nonetheless and forces him into pathetic self-contradictions.
Having enunciated the proposition that the whole trouble with money is its tendency to be scarce and to remain scarcer, he announces virtually in the same breath that the root of the evil actually lies in an “abundance of capital,” or in “excessive savings” or in an excessive “propensity to save.” What possible meaning can all these strictures against excessive “savings” have, if not the recognition that money and money-capital can be and are piled up to the point of glut? And indeed one of the characteristic features of capital crises is precisely the overproduction not only of commodities but of capital, including money-capital.
On page 220 of his book, Keynes concedes that “abundance of capital” can and does interfere with “abundance of output.” In this connection, the phrase “abundance of capital” cannot possibly refer to the abundance of productive capital or capital-goods, because these in the Keynesian dream-world act only as a spur to the “abundance of output” and “full employment.” He must therefore refer here to nothing else but money-capital, more accurately, finance capital. This is made even clearer in his comments relating to “savings,” for money is indeed the chief medium of “saving.”
Take for example Keynes’ proudest boast that he, a “neo-classic,” believes that savings and investments “can actually be unequal.” This has meaning only in the sense that money-capital (“savings”) may and does tend to pile up faster than industrial or commercial capital (“investments”).
There is, of course, a distinction between money-capital and industrial and commercial capital. There is also a clear antagonism between a lender and a borrower of money-capital. Each fulfills a different role under the capitalist mode of production. Suffice it here to say, that the money lender is clearly parasitic, while the parasitism of the other is masked by the transformation of money-capital in his hands into capital goods, raw materials and the purchase of labor power. But the interest of the one and the profit  of the other (average rate of profit less interest) derive from one and the same source the unpaid surplus product extracted from the workers (surplus-value).   
Ignores Role of Monopoly Capital The antagonism between the money-lender (the money capitalist) and the borrower (the industrial capitalist) has been resolved in capitalist practice by the fusion of the two in the guise of finance or monopoly capital. You will not find so much as a whisper in Keynes’ “general theory” about the specific role of monopoly capital today, about its dominance, about its absorption of the lion’s share of “rewards” from all forms of capital. The reality is too naked, too fearsome to face. So Keynes pretends that it is possible to reverse the course of history and, by manipulations of monetary policy, to restore the dominance that industrial capital once enjoyed temporarily over money-capital, and in this way to resume the former high levels of “investments” at home and abroad. A return to the “good old days”: that is the unspoken goal of this “revolutionary” school of economics.
The money rate of interest is “purely traditional,” cried Proudhon and many other money reformers. Keynes subscribes to this superficial notion with both hands.
“There is evidence,” he writes, “that for a period of almost 150 years the long-run typical rate of interest in the leading financial centers was about 5 percent, and the gilt-edged rate between 3 and 3% percent; and that these rates of interest were modest enough to encourage a rate of investment consistent with an average employment which was not intolerably low.” (pp.307-8)
It never enters Keynes’ head that the relative stability of interest rates in the heyday of capitalist development is not at all proof that money has an “interest rate of its own”; it is simply evidence that the average rate of profit over long periods of time had remained relatively stable, thus stabilizing in turn the long-range average interest rates.
With the entry of capitalism into its monopoly or decaying phase, the organic tendency of the rate of profit to fall, manifesting itself as a general tendency, has become more and more pronounced, as was long ago predicted by Karl Marx. Hence also arise the severe periodic convulsions including those of the “money market.”
But Keynes severs money-capital completely from industrial capital. The first, he insists, has remained “most stable.” The second, has declined, both relatively and absolutely.
“But the most stable, and the least easily shifted, element in our contemporary economy has been hitherto, and may prove to be in the future, the minimum rate of interest acceptable to the generality of wealth-owners.” (p.309)
On the other hand, in our century and “presumably for the future the schedule of the marginal efficiency of capital is, for a variety of reasons, much lower than it was in the nineteenth century. The acuteness and the peculiarity of our contemporary problem arises, therefore, out of the possibility that the average rate of interest which will allow a reasonable average rate of employment is one so unacceptable to wealth-owners that it cannot be readily established merely by manipulating the quantity of money.” (p.309)
In plain language this is a bald assertion that the nub of the problem does not lie with the monopoly ownership of the means of production and the sway of finance capital over the whole economy, but is transferred arbitrarily into the sphere of “the minimum rate of interest acceptable to the generality of wealth-owners.”   
Origins of the Keynesian Nostrum There you have the crux of the Keynesian theory of money. As for the cure it is to manipulate not the “quantity of money,” which Keynes forgets is “completely inelastic” to begin with, but the rate of interest, driving it down below its “typical rate” to a desirable “minimum.”
Proudhon, as we remarked, also discerned the root of all evil in money and the “traditional privileges” of money-lenders. He therefore proposed to attack interest by attacking money itself and doing away with it altogether. A latter-day neophyte of Proudhon, one Silvio Gessell by name and German by origin, discerned a “tactical” error in his teacher’s approach. The real trouble lay not in money itself but only in its rate of interest. Gessell proposed to keep money but do away with interest altogether.
Once interest is done away with, then “money power is broken by freed Money. Interest or what Marx called surplus value, is dissolved.” (S. Gessell, The Natural Economic Order, p.9)
How do away with interest? Very simply. All commodities are liable to losses, they either deteriorate or lie in warehouses, subject to storage charges and other vicissitudes of time and fortune, all, that is, except MONEY, whose storage charges are virtually nil. “We must subject money to the loss to which goods are liable through the necessity of storage,” said Gessell and proposed that legal tender be made invalid unless stamped with a monthly tax, approximating 5 percent annually.
This crackpot proposal was greeted with ecstasy during the depression of the Thirties by such eminent scholars as Professor Irving Fisher who declared that, if Gessell’s scheme were adopted, the depression would be dissipated in “two weeks.”
Keynes did not go quite so far. For his part he discerned a tactical error by Gessell. The evil is there to be sure. Keynes cedes to none in his attack on interest:
Interest today rewards no genuine sacrifice, any more than does the rent of. land. The owner of capital can obtain interest because capital is scarce, just as the owner of land can obtain rent because land is scarce. But whilst there may be intrinsic reasons for such scarcity, there are no intrinsic reasons for the scarcity of capital ... I see, therefore, the rentier aspect of capitalism as a transitional phase which will disappear when it has done its work. And with the disappearance of its rentier aspect much else in it besides will suffer a sea-change. It will be, moreover, a great advantage of the order of events which I am advocating, that the euthanasia of the rentier, of the function-less investor, will be nothing sudden, merely a gradual but prolonged continuance of what we have seen recently in Great Britain, and will need no revolution. (p.376)
But interest can not and must not be eliminated altogether. The really correct and “scientific” thing to do is to slash interest rates to a “minimum acceptable to the generality of wealth-owners.”
With this amendment Keynes incorporated Gessell’s proposal of “carrying charges” or money-tax into his own “perfected” theory of money.
“According to my theory,” explains Keynes, “it [the money-tax] should be roughly equal to the excess of the money rate of interest (apart from the stamps) over the marginal efficiency of capital corresponding to the rate of new investment compatible with full employment.” (p.357)
The correct figure, he assures, should be reached by trial and error.
Except for Keynes’ insistence on the retention of a “minimum” interest rate, the similarity between his and Proudhon-Gessell’s theory of money borders on identity.    
The Function of Gold Keynes, like Proudhon, like Gessell, denied that there is any necessary or indissoluble connection between monetary systems and the precious metals, gold in particular. This is an illusion, worse yet, a pernicious piece of nonsense. Keynes goes so far as to imply that the production of gold (gold-mining) is not only sheer waste but silly. “Gold-mining,” he insists, “is the only pretext for digging holes in the ground which has recommended itself to bankers as sound finance.”
Speaking abstractly, money and the money system is assuredly a highly irrational way of achieving the distribution of the social products of labor. But the irrational system of capitalism cannot divest itself, not even by government edicts, of the only machine of circulation at its disposal. Great amounts of social labor must remain fixed in the only form in which they can serve this machine. The expenses are large, very large, and they increase with the perpetuation of capitalism. As Marx pointed out: “They are dead expenses of commodity production in general, and they increase with the development of this production, especially when capitalized. They represent a part of the social wealth which must be sacrificed in the process of circulation.”
Not any commodity but only a certain commodity, namely gold, can perform the function of money and supply the material foundation for the monetary system under capitalism. Gold thereby becomes more than a mere commodity. Keynes may sneer at gold reserves as the foundation of “sound finance.” Capitalist bankers and financiers cannot afford such lightmindedness.
There is not a single currency in the world today that has remained on “the gold standard,” i.e., is directly convertible into gold. But that does not mean that gold reserves have become meaningless or no longer serve as the material basis of all monetary systems. On the contrary, the balance of international trade payments must still be paid in the final reckoning in gold. “Soft currencies” are soft not alone because of their unfavorable trade balance with the “dollar countries” but, above all, because they lack adequate gold reserves to back up their currencies.
The intimate tie between gold and monetary systems was strikingly illustrated by the recent crisis of devaluation that tumbled in its wake the currencies of 32 countries. It sufficed for mere rumors of higher gold prices in terms of the dollar to send tremors throughout the US fiscal system.
Juridically, the capitalist world today does not recognize the gold standard, but these formal actions of all the governments including Washington weigh as so much chaff in the wind. Gold remains the world money.
Proudhon, and after him Gessell, denied “the Marxian doctrine that the power of capital lies in the ownership of tools of production.” Such ownership is really a boon, and is separate and distinct from “supremacy that is rooted in money.” The more capital is created in the shape of means of production, all the weaker must become the power of the capitalists over society as a whole. With this, too, Keynes is in essential accord. In fact, Keynes expresses in passing the assurance that it is “comparatively easy to make capital-goods so abundant that the marginal efficiency of capital is zero; this may be the most sensible way of gradually getting rid of many of the objectionable features of capitalism.” (p.220) But what actually happens as capital goods become “more abundant”? In the Keynesian dream-world this leads to the dissipation of the power of capital. In reality it has led to the concentration of this power in the hands of monopolists.    
A Shamefaced Disciple It may come as a shock to some people that Keynes is at bottom a disciple of Proudhon. He himself never openly acknowledged it. His followers skip over it in embarrassment. But it happens to be an undeniable fact.
Silvio Gessell introduced a “tactical” correction into Proudhon’s monetary views (center the attack not on money but on its interest rate). Sir John offered an even more trifling amendment to Gessell (center the attack not on money but on part of its interest rate). What is this if not a variation upon a variation of Proudhonism?
Keynes hailed Gessell as a thinker “whose work contains flashes of deep insight and who only just failed to reach down to the essence of the matter [i.e. the theory of money].” But Keynes omits to say that Proudhon was Gessell’s avowed master.
Gessell’s purpose, writes Keynes, was the “establishment of an anti-Marxian Socialism ... and in unfettering of competition. I believe that the future will learn more from the spirit of Gessell than from that of Marx.” But Keynes might at least have added that the spirit of Proudhon has unquestionable priority here so far as both the future and the past are concerned.
Plekhanov used to frequently call attention to the clear distinction between two types of disciples shameless and modest ones: Those who are modest never fail gratefully to acknowledge how much they owe to their teachers. Sir John belongs to the other type those who borrow, more accurately, plagiarize, without any acnowledgment.
Keynes is indebted to none other than Proudhon for the conception that what really limits the expansion of capitalist production is not capitalism itself (i.e. the private ownership of the means of production) but a specific money rate of interest (called “traditional”, by Proudhonists and “typical” by Keynes).
As an avowed disciple of Proudhon, Gessell writes:
“As soon as capital ceases to yield the traditional interest, money strikes and brings work to a standstill.” (Op. cit., p.7)
The shamefaced disciple of Proudhon, Sir John writes:
“Rate of interest of money plays a peculiar part in setting a limit to the level of employment, since it sets a standard to which the marginal efficiency of a capital-asset must attain if it is to be newly produced.” (p.222)
The words may differ, but the idea remains exactly the same. The formulations of Proudhon-Gessell have the advantage that they are expressed in humanly understandable language. Keynes like all his colleagues prefers to operate with academic gibberish. But the whole point is that neither the “strike of money” nor the alleged inability of a “capital-asset” to attain “a standard of marginal efficiency” is in any direct way connected with prevailing money rates of interest. Such a connection or “limit” is sheer fiction.   
Fluctuation of Interest Rates As I have already pointed out, interest rates can stay very low both in periods of depression as well as those of boom. Conversely, the history of capitalism knows periods of high money rates both during booms and depressions. Nor are combinations unknown: that is, money rates may go up and down during depressions as well as during booms; or they may go down in booms and up in depressions, and so on. Anyone studying the gyrations of the money market over a prolonged period can convince himself that there has never been a “traditional” or “typical” money rate. As I stated, it is possible to estimate a maximum which is fixed by the average rate of profit for a given period, but there is no minimum whatever.
If one were to choose a sphere of economic life where accident plays the decisive role, it is in the sphere of the money market. To talk of lawfulness here is to delude oneself and others. It goes without saying, that the “money market” does not lead an independent existence; in the final analysis, developments here, too, are subject to the laws that dominate economic life as a whole. But it has its peculiar characteristics, and these turn out to be just the opposite of those abscribed to it by Keynes and his followers.
Keynes’ money theory, if we observe it closely, is at the same time intended to explain not only “the peculiar attributes of the monetary system,” but also to provide a slick explanation for capitalist crises. Why are there crises under capitalism? In answer Keynes offers up the selfsame “theory of money”:
Unemployment [read: crisis] develops, that is to say, because people want the moon; men cannot be employed when the object of desire (i.e., money) is something which cannot be produced and the demand for which cannot readily be choked off. There is no remedy but to persuade the public that green cheese is practically the same thing and to have a green cheese factory (i.e., a central bank) under public control. (p.235)
No matter how you slice this cheese, it is still Proudhon.
Now Proudhon in concocting his monetary Utopia was at least motivated by a genuine hatred of capitalist exploitation and a sincere desire to improve the lot of the workers. Keynes and his colleagues remain case-hardened champions of capitalism and are impelled by fears of a mass revolt against their outlived system.
“It is certain,” Keynes concedes, “that the world will not much longer tolerate the unemployment which, apart from brief intervals of excitement, is associated and, in my opinion, inevitably associated with present-day capitalistic individualism. But it may be possible by a right analysis of the problem to cure the disease whilst preserving efficiency and freedom.” (p.381)
By “efficiency and freedom,” Keynes means the private ownership of the means of production, the capitalist system as a whole.
His own conclusion is that the monetary reforms and other “encroachments” he advocates are “the only practicable means of avoiding the destruction of existing economic forms in their entirety.” (p.380)
While others have talked about the “Keynesian revolution” in economics and the like, he himself recommended his theory as “moderately conservative in its implications.” After the introduction of all his reforms and “central controls” there will be, in his opinion, “no more reason to socialize economic life than there was before.” (p.379)
In the middle of the last century, Proudhon, the petty-bourgeois Utopian, succeeded in selling many European workers his monetary panacea as the quickest and most painless way of getting rid of capitalism. In the middle of our century the same silly fable, with minor variations, is being swallowed by “labor statesmen” in this country and, what is far worse, being peddled by them to the workers as a guarantee for ushering in the “Welfare State.”


 While the official figures for 1948 will not be available for several months, the general outlines of last year’s economic developments are quite clear. We propose to sketch them roughly.
On the whole the official summary, when it is released, will show column after column bristling with record-breaking figures, surpassing the levels of the previous two years, 1946 and 1947, in one field after another.
To illustrate, the 1948 gross annual product passed beyond the quarter of a trillion dollar mark. This is an increase over 1946 of approximately one-fifth. Income for “personal expenditures” shows a similar increase. It has been running at an annual increase of $46 billion over the 1946 rate. National income figures are even more glowing, with a hike of more than one-quarter above 1946. And as every housewife knows, prices and living costs have risen just as steeply. But steepest of all has been the rise of profits which have rocketed to $20 billion, or an increase of 75 percent since two years ago.
What all these and other astronomical figures will not show is that physical production and employment have not, on the whole, risen last year, to any appreciable extent over the previous two years. For individual industries like steel and auto, 1948 has indeed been a year of record “peacetime” production. But these increases were nullified by sagging output in other lines (textiles, household appliances, coal, leather and others). In plain language this means that 1948 was the third and peak year of the postwar speculative boom. We do not at all mean to say that because of this speculative nature, the boom did not signify conditions of prosperity.
On the contrary, for the capitalists it was the lushest year in their entire history. It was very real indeed, especially in terms of profits. In this sense, the last eight years of the war and postwar prosperity are comparable only with the era of the fabulous peacetime prosperity experienced in the Twenties. The world had never seen a capitalist economy operate on a scale that US economy did, on a peacetime basis, from 1921 to 1929. Nor did the world ever see before any other economy pass through a war and postwar boom comparable with the one in this country from 1941 to 1948.
Yes, the current speculative boom was quite real in 1948 and it remains no less imposing as it heads into its fourth postwar year. But if we look a little more closely at what happened in 1948, we shall see that a number of important changes took place on the economic scene. These changes are also real; they, too, have an important bearing on the future course of developments. They must be taken into account, otherwise the 1948 balance sheet would be far too one-sided.   
Some Important Changes To begin with, an important change has occurred in the field of foreign trade. In 1947, US exports amounted to 15.3 billion dollars. The 1948 export figures did not come anywhere near these levels, despite the multi billion ECA program. This is a new downward trend.
Both 1946 and 1947 found the commodity markets very strong. Here, too, there was a change in 1948, which experienced early in the year a sharp break in the commodity markets. Only government subsidies in the shape of Federal price supports for the various crops kept agriculture from collapsing. This trend in agriculture—which is a downward trend — is likewise something new.
1948 also marked the beginning of a sharp reversal of former trends so far as the internal market is concerned. For example, the formation of new enterprises has leveled off. This has been a very important field of the home market. In the last three years the number of new businesses has run into millions, providing a very substantial outlet for industry and for capital investments at home.
The second part of 1948 saw the beginnings of a reverse process. Not only has the rate of new business formation slackened, but there has also been a speeding up of the rate at which established enterprises have been liquidated.
According to the authoritative Dun’s Review December 1948,
“Business failures increased more than seasonally to 461 in October. This was slightly below the March and June totals, but it was above that of any other October in the past six years; it was considerably less than the 1,111 failures in October 1940.”
The comparison with prewar levels is quite favorable, but there is one feature which is rather unfavorable.
“The liabilities involved in October failures,” points out Dun’s Review, “rose considerably to $101,060,000, the highest volume on record except that of April 1932. One failure involving liabilities of $75,000,000 accounted principally for the rise. Excluding this failure, however, liabilities were larger than in any October since 1935. Failures with liabilities of $100,000 or more rose sharply to 42, the same number as a year ago. Increases above a month and a year ago occurred in all other size groups; the sharpest rise was among small failures involving liabilities under $5,000.”
To be sure, this represents only a cloud on the economic horizon. But there were no such clouds up till now and the recent rise in failures places a big question mark over what will happen in the days ahead to other enterprises, especially the dwarf-sued ones.
The third quarter of 1948 witnessed still another development in the internal market, a sharp six-week drop in retail sales during the Christmas season. A six-week decline does not constitute a definitive trend. Nevertheless, this drop was sharp enough to transform the Christmas sales season into a flop. The retailers and all the business circles are now looking hard at the figures of the last two months and trying to determine just what they mean. Nobody knows. That the domestic market has been impaired is shown by the facts already at hand, but what still remains in doubt is the depth and scope of this impairment.
A key sector of the internal market still shows considerable strength in two closely interrelated lines: metals and automobiles. The metal market is strongly propped up by both the arms program and the booming automotive industry, the largest single consumer of steel. The acid test for retail trade lies still ahead. It will come in the first quarter of 1949. But the fact remains, that no such major problems loomed either in 1946 or in 1947.
Overshadowing all the other developments in 1948 was the massive “peacetime” intervention by the state into the country’s economic life. ECA billions, we repeat, bolstered up foreign trade; other billions placed a floor under agriculture. But all this by no means exhausts the current role of the state. By the third quarter of 1948 the Federal government was purchasing “goods and services” at an annual rate of $38 billion, an increase of 21 percent over 1946. The bulk of these billions have gone into arms production, and such expenditures are unquestionably on the increase.
The various economic measures employed by Washington, especially its role as by far the biggest single outlet for both industry and agriculture, have fed the postwar boom, and by the same token, the inflation.
The spectacular results thus far achieved have led some capitalist experts and many individuals in the labor movement, especially among the top union officialdom, to talk of a “regulated capitalist economy.” Very well. Here is a partial list of what the Federal government must undertake to “regulate” in 1949.   
A Few 1949 Problems The 1948 decline in foreign trade, first and foremost in exports, will be carried over into the current year. To maintain exports at previous levels, not less but more ECA billions will be needed than was the case last year. Why? Because the world “dollar shortage” remains as acute as it ever was, despite the fact that the sums originally allotted for the ECA by Congress for a period of 15 months have been expended, by Truman’s Executive Order, in less than eight months. To continue maintaining a floor under sagging exports will not prove so easy in 1949 as it was before. It may, in fact, prove too expensive even for the American colossus.
The downward trend in the commodity markets will likewise be carried over into 1949. Barring natural catastrophes, the food and industrial crops produced by agriculture will continue at record levels. If in 1948 a worldwide glut in the commodity markets was only a prospect, then in 1949 it bids well to become the reality. Government warehouses are already bulging wih unsold bales of cotton, tons of corn, wheat, fats, butter, eggs and so on down the line. We do not mean to say by this, that a collapse of these markets cannot be averted by vigorous state intervention. What we do insist upon is that no amount of government intervention can reverse the downward trend. It can be modified, but at a far greater expense than ever before. Given a sharp improvement in world agriculture as a whole, it is by no means excluded that farm subsidies may also prove too expensive on an all-out scale for even the American colossus.
In addition to these and other major economic problems which have already been subjected to “regulation” by the state, there have appeared on the horizon a whole series of new problems. We shall enumerate some of them at random, without attempting do so in the order of their relative importance.
Barring a sudden shift to full-scale war production, which would eliminate all the “normal” problems only in order to replace them with others of a different order, the Truman administration is running smack into the question of inventories. Up to now these have been an asset in the operation of the boom. Inventories have grown spectacularly, providing one of the major outlets for industry and for capital investments. In the last three years one-third and more of all new investments have been going into inventory accumulation. A quarter of a trillion dollar boom comes roaring into the new year with $55 billion of goods, more than half of them in the hands of manufacturers, the rest held by wholesalers and retailers.
One of the reasons why the results of the Christmas sales have thus far proved inconclusive has been the absence of any overall liquidation of accumulated inventories. There has been only scattered liquidation in several lines of consumer goods. There have been some distress sales, many lines have been really hurt for the first lime in eight years, but not on a scale that threatens to swamp the market immediately. Here, too, the acid test is still to come.
But if nothing else were to result except a drastic reduction of inventory speculation, it would by itself pose such grave problems as the following: How to prop up the 1949 outlets for new capital investments, which may be faced with a decline up to one-third of former levels? What measures will be effective in preventing any general distress liquidation of inventories, and in maintaining them at least at 1948 levels? Large-scale government credits to business are already being talked about. Such and other measures are by no means excluded. But the problem of placing a “floor” under inventories or under declining capital investments is not at all identical with such problems as propping up exports or farm crops. The scope and the cost in this field is of an entirely different order from anything that has yet been faced by the masterminds in Washington.    
More Taxation Again, the ever-present problem of taxes arises in a new form. During the last three years, the Federal budget permitted of sizable expansions with slight dangers of deficit government spending. There was not only talk of reducing taxes, but also a whopping slash last year. To be sure, it profited exclusively the rich; but it was a slash nonetheless in the face of expanding government expenditures. This was another shot in the arm to the boom. It is a foregone conclusion that 1949 will see bigger taxes, whose brunt will fall on the mass of the people. This automatically poses the question: How much can the taxes be raised and the Federal budget expanded without incurring the risk of deficit government spending?
In a full-scale war economy, deficit spending is the norm. In an economy that operates within the range of current Federal budgets and on an overall civilian basis, deficit government spending is highly inflationary and therefore dangerous.
Among other things, it places the country’s fiscal system under severe strains. Here we come to still another new problem that must be “regulated” in 1949 on a scale hitherto undreamed of. How much additional load can the credit system carry without producing severe convulsions? Nobody knows any more than anybody can tell in advance how many new cars, produced next year, may suffice to glut the auto market.
In brief, over these and a number of other interrelated problems — the actual condition of the domestic market, the solvency of many weakened lines (especially among the little businessmen), the extent of unemployment in the next period, the scope of rearmament, etc.—there now hangs, a question mark. In many instances, a big question mark.
From all indications, the intervention of the state in economic life will be far more massive in 1949 than it was last year. As a matter of fact, the number of champions of “free enterprise” who are already clamoring for more and bigger intervention by the state and pinning all hopes on it, has been recently increasing at a geometric rate. All these gentlemen are due for many rude surprises. Should unfavorable trends, which have not yet set in, actually materialize within the next six months, then no amount of “regulation’ by the stale will achieve more than a temporary respite. What is more, a definitive reversal of all the existing trends and those in the making, can be achieved in one way and one way only: through a rapid shiftover to a full-scale war economy.   
The Need to Prepare There are no sufficient grounds at this writing for a flat statement that a depression has already set in, or will shortly set in. But there are even less grounds for the confident statement emanating from Washington to the effect that there is nothing seriously wrong with the country’s economy. These optimists are merely whistling in the dark. We continue as pessimistic as last year about the future prospects of American capitalism. Least of all, have the workers any grounds for an outlook different from ours.
Regardless of which variant the economic process takes, all the 1949 “solutions” and adjustments will be worked out by Washington in favor of the capitalists and at the expense of the mass of the people.
The most ironical feature of the situation is that the official labor leaders, with the Social Democrats in the van, are the biggest optimists of all. For every bull in Wall Street and Washington, there are a dozen super-optimists among this crew. If they mention the danger of depression at all, it is to speak of it as the remotest of remote eventualities. They talk of “seeds” of a future depression, and nothing more, while in Wall Street, for example, moods of anxiety are reflected in the extremely sober condition of the stock market.
But these super-optimists do much more than exude unbounded confidence in “free enterprise”; they are working check by jowl with the Truman Democrats to promote the interests of the capitalists. They have done yeoman labor in every sphere but one—safeguarding the workers from being caught by surprise by a sudden outbreak of either war or depression.
So far as the eventuality of war is concerned, they are among its prime boosters. They have promoted the war plans of the American monopolists by their all-out support of the Marshall Plan and the 1948 “preparedness” program. They are pledged to continue this support in 1949 as well. By this they have, moreover, helped clear the ground for a shiftover to a war economy, if and when the ruling class decides upon this desperate course.
As for preparing the workers for struggle under depression conditions, they have done exactly nothing. They refuse even to seriously consider the proposal of the Socialist Workers Party that the national labor movement launch immediately a “militant, united, nationwide campaign for the 30-hour week, 6-hour day with no reduction in take-home pay.” (The Militant, December 20, 1948.)
A step like this along with similar actions would not at all be premature. One must prepare for any serious eventuality well in advance; otherwise it is possible to be caught by surprise and find oneself in a position where adequate preparations are either impossible or must be made on an emergency basis.
Anyone who deliberately counsels the workers to follow a different course, to bide their time, to first “wait and see” and the like, is offering not the advice of a friend but that of a gullible dupe or a disguised enemy.



Three Who Made A Revolution
by Bertram D. Wolfe
The Dial Press, N.Y. 1948. 661 pp. $4.50.
The avowed design of this book is to explain the course of modern Russian events – from the Russian Revolution to its aftermath – in terms of the three main protagonists – Lenin, Trotsky, Stalin. But the real design is highly partisan and polemical. It is not at all, as the author pretends, to establish historical truth through conscientious and scientific research. The aim is rather to prove that Stalinism flows inexorably from Leninism; and that both Stalinism and Leninism, in their turn, flow just as “inexorably” from the soil, soul and “heritage” of Russia.
The history of Russia is pictured as the struggle between East and West for the “Russian soul.” In this scheme, so beloved by many renegades from Marxism, the West stands for everything cultured, humanitarian, progressive, and, of course, for the very incarnation of “democracy.” The East – or the “Slavic” – is made synonymous with the worst of Asiatic’’ barbarism, “authoritarianism,” far-flung in its “centralism” and “ubiquitous bureaucratism” and “million-headed armies” and the like. That’s what you always had in Russia; that’s what you have today.
In such a historical “heritage” there is no room at all for the Russian Revolution, or for the founding of the first workers’ state, and the entire world heritage contained in these decisive events of modern history; So all this is expunged. How? By converting everything into a mere episode of “Russian expansionism.”
The biographer grants in passing that the Russian Revolution did not at all begin this way. But what is a mere “beginning”? “In the end,” asserts Wolfe, the Russian Revolution simply provided “the greatest dynamic power of expansion that Russia had ever known.” Any historian who tried to explain the Great French Revolution as a phase of “French expansionism” would be laughed out of court. But today there is a whole school of “historians” who dismiss in this way the greatest social upheaval yet witnessed on our planet.
To make his three protagonists fit into this fraudulent pattern, the author cuts short all his “biographies” at the point where he must present his conclusive proofs. The Russian Revolution and its aftermath is likewise expunged from all three “biographies.”
Lenin is made to emerge in this book as a complex blend of “Slavic” (Asiatic) and “Western” psychical traits. Trotsky is depicted as a “romantic” and “promethean” type with somewhat greater leanings toward “Westernism” who in the end makes peace with Lenin’s “Slavism.” Stalin, on the other hand, begins and ends as a pure Asiatic.
In Wolfe’s eyes, Lenin was “by his convictions” a “democrat” with occasional leanings toward humanitarianism and other “Western” virtues. But by temperament and will and “the organizational structure of his party,” he was an “authoritarian,” i.e., a pure Slav.
This conflict between the barbarous Slav and the cultured Westerner was resolved in Lenin’s case in 1917.
“For up to his seizure of power in 1917, Lenin always remained by conviction a democrat, however much his temperament and will and the organizational structure of his party may have conflicted with his democratic convictions.”
Such is the gist of Wolfe’s “researches.”
It is in this way that Lenin is represented as spiritually akin to Stalin; Lenin’s party is equated to its polar opposite – the party under Stalin; and the Soviet regime under Lenin and Trotsky to that of the Kremlin since Lenin died. This is not history but a despicable caricature.
Lenin, as a personality and a great historic figure alike, attained full growth precisely in the years of the revolution, the Civil War, the building of the young Soviet Republic and of the Communist International. The same is true of Trotsky.
Stalin, on the contrary, did not emerge as a prominent historical figure until after Lenin’s death. He was an obscure figure not only before 1917, as Wolfe concedes, but also during the entire initial period after’ 1917. It is impossible to squeeze Stalin into the role of the “third” protagonist in these great events, just as it is impossible to ascribe to him the role of Lenin’s “second” which Stalin arrogates to himself.
If one could speak of a “third” in the Russian Revolution itself, in addition to Lenin and Trotsky, it was Sverdlov, and could not possibly be Stalin. But Sverdlov died prematurely in 1919 and no one replaced him, least of all Stalin. In the galaxy of Bolshevik leaders who did play a prominent role it is not so easy to single out any one individual after Lenin and Trotsky, the two preeminent leaders at the time. Zinoviev, Kamenev, Bukharin, Rykov, even Radek, played a far more prominent part from 1917 to 1923 than Stalin.
Stalin, as matter of fact, owed his rise to the post of General Secretary not to Lenin but rather to Zinoviev; and his actual rise to prominence dates back to the formation of the first real – and not fictitious – triumvirate in the history of the Russian Bolshevik Party – that of Zinoviev, Kamenev and Stalin. This was later supplanted by still another troika – that of Stalin-Bukharin-Rykov.
In terms of personalities that was the actual evolution of Stalin as he was to appear on the historical scene. But all this falls away in order to make possible the bracketing together of Lenin and Trotsky – the two unchallenged leaders of the Russian Revolution – with Stalin, who rose to power and prominence only as the undisputed leader of the counter-revolution.
Wolfe is no novice at this game. He served his apprenticeship in misinterpreting Russian events under Lovestone during the early years of the American Communist Party. He then tailored his quotations, facts and historical interpretations to suit the requirements of the Stalin-Bukharin-Rykov bloc in the Kremlin. Today, this ex-Lovestoneite serves different masters, whose requirements dictate a different approach to history. The “democratic” pattern of interpretation – in the service of American imperialism – differs in form but not in substance from the much earlier “anti-Trotskyist” pattern of this scholar. Both are equally false. But where before, posing as a Marxist, Wolfe slandered Trotsky and Trotskyism, today, as an anti-Marxist, he slanders both Lenin and Trotsky, the whole of Bolshevism, the whole of the Russian Revolution and the early history of the Soviet Union.
In this respect we have just another contribution from the pens of renegades from communism to the flood of anti-Marxist and anti-Leninist literature. The market, gentlemen, is already glutted.
 


 America, the home of modern advertising, has been subjected in the last few years to the most high-powered and streamlined huckstering it has known in its history. Tens of millions of dollars have been spent in this campaign to sell the idea to the American people that the giant trusts and monopolies which dominate our country’s economic life represent a system of “free enterprise.” If ever there was a violation of the Pure Food and Drug Law, which deals with the crime of adulteration of products, this is it. Unfortunately, there is nothing in the law to prevent Big Business from misrepresenting itself to the public, nothing to prevent pasting of false labels on bottles of ideological poison.
This lie, on a par with any of those ever disseminated by Goebbels’ Propaganda Ministry or the Kremlin, is intended both for domestic and foreign consumption. By the very volume of misinformation, Big Business hopes to bury the damning facts uncovered in the Thirties concerning the true ownership of America’s wealth, industries and resources published in such books as Ferdinand Lundberg’s America’s Sixty Families and popularized in Roosevelt’s phrases “economic royalists.” By this powerful injection of the narcotic of the lie, Big Business hopes to create among its subjects the illusion that they still live as in the days of Jackson and Jefferson in a land of “equal opportunity” and “freedom of enterprise.”
For the rest of the world, “free enterprise” is a new label for the discredited word “imperialism,” although the Wall Street conquistadors differ from their foreign predecessors only in greater wealth and power. It is presented as an alternative to the totalitarianism of the Kremlin, although here too the dictatorship exercised by the oligarchy of business and finance is unprecedented in the history of the world.
The truth is, despite the torrent of misinformation being poured upon the country, that “free enterprise” is as extinct as the buffalo. Monopoly control and domination has become virtually all-embracing. The real rulers of our country are neither “rugged individuals” nor “self-made men” nor anything that remotely resembles the mythology so elaborately created by Wall Street’s hucksters. They are dynasties — plutocratic dynasties of parasitic families who have generation by generation grown fantastically richer at the expense of the American people. They are the Rockefeller, the Morgans, the Mellons, the du Ponts, the Vanderbilt, the Guggenheim, the Fords, the Gianninis & Company.
It is these tiny groups along with the rest of America’s sixty richest families who dominate the 113 biggest manufacturing corporations with assets of more than 100 million dollars each, which, in turn, own directly more than 50 percent of our nation’s total industrial property, plant and equipment. How much they own and control indirectly it is possible only to surmise.
We can get a clue to the actual state of affairs from certain salient facts which relate to the growth of super-monopolies not only in industry but also in banking and insurance. There are today 56 of these super-monopolies and they are all securely held by the above-mentioned families of multimillionaires.
In 1929, the biggest peacetime boom year in our history prior to the Frantic Forties, there were exactly 20 corporations with assets of a billion or more.
By December 1941, when the US was plunged into World War II, the number of these super-monopolies had increased by more than 50 percent, swelling to a total of 32. This fact alone is irrefutable proof that the policies of the Roosevelt administration did not “drive the money changers from the temple” but, on the contrary, promoted their welfare and favored their growth.
The most spectacular growth, however, has been registered in the last eight years. In 1948 the Billionaire Corporations Club numbered 56, or more than 2½ times the total in 1929. This rate of growth is at the same time indicative of the whirlwind speed at which the handful of plutocrats have been gobbling up the wealth and resources of the nation. Since little is generally known about the growth of these super-monopolies, we shall adduce a few of the salient facts relating to them. There are today 20 super-banks: 12 super-insurance trusts; six super-trusts in utilities other than railroads, which have six super-corporations of their own; there are, in addition, six oil super-trusts and alongside them, an equal number of huge industrial combines. These 56 billionaire corporations constitute the heart of the greatest monopoly empire in history. Between them thesemonopolies own assets aggregating $129¼ billion. This privately owned sum is enough to stagger the human imagination. It amounts to more than one-half of the national debt which stood in 1948 at $251 billion.
It surpasses by at least a score of billions the total assets of ALL THE MANUFACTURING CORPORATIONS IN THIS COUNTRY currently estimated to be in the neighborhood of $100 billion. In other words, the biggest corporations have enough cash on hand to buy out all their competitors and still have plenty to spare in their treasuries. Let us take a closer look at these super-monopolies.   
Power of Twenty Super Banks As of last year, there were twenty super-banks towering above this country’s fiscal structure. Between them they control more than 43½ billion dollars in assets. Listed in order of their relative size these are:
    THE SUPER-BANKS
       Bank
  Assets   (in billions)
      1.
  Bank of America, NT & SA
  6.073
      2.
  National City Bank (NY)
  5.127
      3.
  Chase National (NY)
  4.631
      4.
  Guaranty Trust (NY)
  2.785
      5.
  Manufacturers Trust (NY)
  2.390
      6.
  Cont. Ill. Bank & Tr. (Chi.)
  2.356
      7.
  First National Bank, Chicago
  2.245
      8.
  Secur. First National (LA)
  1.726
      9.
  Chemical Bank (NY)
  1.584
    10.
  Central Hanover Bank & T’r, NY
  1.544
    11.
  Bankers Trust (NY)
  1.525
    12.
  First National, Boston
  1.519
    13.
  Mellon National Bank (Pitts.)
  1.402
    14.
  Northwest Bancorp
  1.332
    15.
  National Bank, Detroit
  1.276
    16.
  Bank of Manhattan (NY)
  1.267
    17.
  Irving Trust (NY)
  1.244
    18.
  First Bank Stock
  1.211
    19.
  Marine Midland Tr. (NY)
  1.137
    20.
  Cleveland Trust
  1.100
    Telltale as this list is, it tells only a part of the story of concentration of power in the key financial field. Omitted here is the interlocking network between these giant banking institutions, their foreign holdings and ties, their connections with and power over small and middle-sized banks, including the savings banks, not to mention the various giant banking holding companies unlisted above.
It would take a good-sized volume to depict in detail the stranglehold which the biggest commercial banks have on the fiscal structure. Suffice it to point out that the ten biggest banks (six in New York City, two in Chicago and two in California) hold some $30.5 billion, or almost 70 percent of the total assets of these super-banks themselves. And even this control is further narrowed to a very small group of individuals which exercises complete sway over this hierarchy within a hierarchy in commercial banking.
These are the three mightiest groups: the Rockefeller, Morgan and Giannini interests.
The Giarmini group of California IS in control of the biggest single bank in the country and is at the head of the Transamerica Corp., which includes several smaller banks on the West Coast. They are reportedly also the holders of the largest single block of stock in the next biggest bank, National City Bank of New York.
The Rockefeller dynasty has as its operating base the Chase National Bank, third largest in the US, and is interlocked with the Manufacturers Trust Co, fifth largest, and several smaller banks.
The Morgan group dominates the Guaranty Trust Co. and Bankers Trust Co., fourth and eleventh in size respectively, and is interlocked with the second largest, the National City Bank of New York, as well as with Central Hanover Bank & Trust Co., Irving Trust Co., Chemical Bank & Trust Co., Marine Midland Trust Co., let alone many lesser banks including their wholly owned J.P. Morgan, & Co., and Drexel &  Co. (Philadelphia branch of the combine).
This Big Three in commercial banking share their power with the Mellon dynasty (the aluminum trust) and the leading Wall Street groups (Kuhn, Loeb &, Co., Halsey, Stuart & Co., Dillon, Read & Co., and Lee, Higginson & Co.). In other words, a shut-in circle of scarcely more than ten groups.   
Behemoths in Insurance When we pass over to the field of insurance, the picture becomes even more somber. In insurance there are 12 super-monopolies who divide among them assets of almost $40 billion.
    THE SUPER-TRUSTS IN INSURANCE
       Firm
  Assets  (in billions)
      1.
  Metropolitan Life
  9.156
      2.
  Prudential Life
  7.846
      3.
  Equitable Life
  4.883
      4.
  New York Life
  4.448
      5.
  John Hancock Mutual
  2.465
      6.
  Mutual Life NY
  1.997
      7.
  First National Bank, Chicago
  2.245
      8.
  Travelers Ins. Co.
  1.775
      9.
  Aetna Life Ins.
  1.500
    10.
  Mass. Mutual
  1.234
    11.
  Penn Mutual
  1.181
    12.
  Mutual Benefit
  1.180
    Again we have an oligarchy within an oligarchy, with the six largest insurance companies holding more than 75 percent of the total assets of the super-insurance trusts. The concentration of power here has gone beyond that in the field of banking. By placing side by side the current assets of these companies with those in the early Thirties, we can get an indication of how rapidly these giants have grown.
At the end of 1932, Metropolitan Life had $3.8 billion in assets; it now holds $9.1 billion, or almost 2½ times as much as before. It is followed by Prudential ($7.8 billion as against $2.8 billion in 1932); Equitable Life ($4.9 billion as against $1.5); New York Life ($4.5 as against $2.0); John Hancock Mutual ($2.5 as against less than a billion); Northwestern Mutual ($2.3 as against less than a billion).
Mutual Life, NY, formerly the fifth ranking insurance company (with $1.1 billion) has dropped to seventh place (with $1.99 billion). The others in the galaxy used to have assets of less than a billion but in the neighborhood of half a billion. The rate of growth of each company has varied, but it will be observed that all of them—from the largest to the “smallest”—have expanded at relatively the same rate, from 2 to 2½ times their former size.
Now, whose hands do we find deep in these largest insurance companies? Yes, you have guessed the answer, if you didn’t already know it. It is the Rockefeller, the Morgans, the Mellons, the du Ponts, the Vanderbilt, the Guggenheim, the Fords, the Gianninis & Company. Entrenched firmest of all are the Morgans and the Rockefellers, who share their power with the leading Wall Street groups and the rest of the richest sixty families.   
The Public Utility Giants Next to the banks and insurance companies in point of size and power are the public utilities. The concentration of power in this field is as marked as it is elsewhere. There are six giants who dispose of some 16 billion dollars in holdings.
    THE PUBLIC UTILITY SUPER-TRUST
       Company
  Assets   (in billions)
    1.
  Bell System
  10.000
    2.
  Consolidated Edison, NY
    1.449
    3.
  Commonwealth & Southern
    1.385
    4.
  Pacific Gas & Electric
    1.132
    5.
  Commonwealth Edison
    1.043
    6.
  American Power & Light
    1.006
    It can be seen at a glance that the Bell System, the largest single enterprise in the capitalist world, which has superseded Metropolitan Life formerly holding this post of pre-eminence, overshadows all the rest. The power of powers in public utilities is the Morgan group, strongly entrenched in the Bell System, in Consolidated Edison of New York, and in Commonwealth and Southern. The Morgans share this empire with the Rockefellers and the Mellons and the du Ponts and the lesser dynasties among the richest of the rich.   
The Industrial Empires When we come to large-scale industry we again find six super-billionaire monopolies. Between them these Cyclopeans divide assets of about 101/3 billion dollars. The concentration of power and the extent of monopoly dominance is as breath-taking here as elsewhere. A handful of plutocratic dynasties rules the roost unchallenged.
    THE SUPER-MONOPOLIES IN INDUSTRY
       Corporation
  Assets   (in billions)
     Dynasties in control
    1.
  Gen. Motors Corp.
  2.958
  Morgan-du Pont
    2.
  US Steel Corp.
  2.535
  Morgan & Co.
    3.
  EI du Pont
  1.585
  The du Ponts
    4.
  General Electric
  1.177
  Morgan-Mellon
    5.
  Beth. Steel Corp.
  1.030
  Morgan-Mellon-Rockefeller
    6.
  Ford Motor Co.
  1.026
  The Fords
    Not included in the above list is the Mellon aluminum imperial domain which still refrains publicly from admitting to assets of more than a billion, a practice followed for years by several other oligarchic dynasties, particularly the du Ponts. In this way at least two purposes are served, the extent of monopoly power is kept hidden from public view and from the tax collectors. The du Ponts, who are the power of powers in the chemical industry and among the munition makers, have grown to the point where this is no longer possible. The Mellons still play coy.
The du Ponts, along with the other ranking plutocratic families, are from two to three times as rich and powerful today as they were in the prewar days. Naturally this takes into account only their domestic holdings. Their power and wealth, like those of the rest of the Sixty Families, extend to the four corners of out planet. Their foreign holdings, investments and connections are, so to speak, super-secrets. No one really knows the full scope of the American Economic Empire abroad. But their acknowledged domestic properties provide ample grounds judgment.
On January 1, 1932, E.I. du Pont de Nemours & Co. listed its assets as being below $600 million; in 1948 these were listed as almost $1,600 million, or proximately three times as large. Other members of Big Six in industry who have publicly acknowledged similar rates of growth are: General Motors Corporation ($2.96 billion as against $1.31 billion in 1932); General Electric ($1.18 as against $0.44 billion); Bethlehem Steel Corporation. ($1.03 as against $0.71 billion); Ford Motor Co. ($1.03 as against $0.72 billion). US Steel Corp. by fancy juggling with figures has kept its gains down on paper, registering a rise from $2.28 billion in 1932 to “only” $2.54 billion in 1948.
If there were no figures available other than those relating to the monstrous growth of monopoly in large scale industry, these would suffice to show how big a demagogue Franklin Delano Roosevelt really was. Among his many promises was that no one but no one—would ever coin millions out of human misery or bloodshed under his administration. They coined not millions, but billions upon billions.
And among the chief beneficiaries were the Morgans and the du Ponts, the most notorious profiteers of World War I.   
Rockefeller’s Oil Domain The overwhelming dominance of the Morgan group and its allies (the du Ponts, Mellons, et al.) in large-scale industry is counterbalanced by the power of the rival gang—the Rockefeller and their retainers—in the oil industry. In the Oil Empire six super-trusts, whose tentacles extend all over the world, dispose of more than 10 billion dollars in assets; with the Rockefeller interests controlling four out of the six.
    THE OIL SUPER-TRUSTS
       Corporation
  Assets   (in billions)
     Dynasties in control
    1.
  Standard Oil, NJ
  3.526
  Rockefeller
    2.
  Standard Oil, Ind.
  1.500
       ditto
    3.
  Socony-Vacuum
  1.443
       ditto
    4.
  Texas Corp.
  1.277
  “Independent” [1]
    5.
  Gulf Oil Corp.
  1.191
  Mellons
    6.
  Standard Oil, Calif.
  1.075
  Rockefeller
    Needless to say, in oil, as in large-scale industry as in public utilities and as in finance, the assets and, ties of the oil super-trusts are not confined to those they publicly acknowledge. They dominate the industry from top to bottom at home; they have vast foreign holdings, seeking to dominate the world supply much as they do at home. They require “their own” sources of reserves, raw materials and the like. They require “their own” arenas of marketing not only at home but abroad (colonies, “spheres of influence”).    
Railroad Super-Monopolies Finally, there is the field of railroads, one of the oldest preserves of the monopolists. Here six super-trusts hold between them cash and material wealth to the thumping sum of 9½ billion dollars.
    THE SUPER-MONOPOLIES IN RAIL
       RR
  1948 Assets  (in billions)
  1932 Assets  (estimated)
    1.
  Pennsylvania
  2.306
    2.782
    2.
  New York Central
  1.754
    2.201
    3.
  So. Pacific
  1.736
    2.212
    4.
  Texas Corp.
  1.293
    1.120
    5.
  Baltimore & Ohio
  1.234
    1.223
    6.
  Union Pacific
  1.187
    1.111
     
  Total
  9.510
  10.649
    The picture in railways is especially instructive because it underscores the parasitic character of monopoly control. Railroads are the oldest US monopoly with corporations entering this field before the Civil War. The monopolists have not only accumulated unbelievable fortunes in railway speculation, dividends, mergers, etc., but as the foregoing table shows they have also siphoned off into their own coffers more than 1 billion dollars in material assets. The Big Six rail network is “worth” less today than it was sixteen years ago at the depth of the depression, and this despite the war and the postwar boom, despite the billions in government subsidies poured into the railways, not to mention a whole series of rail-rate boosts in the same space of years. The railway pirates of the pioneer monopoly era, were tin-horn pikers compared to the looters and pillagers of our day.
But their family identity remains, except for a few individuals, much the same. The Morgan group is dominant in the New York Central and Santa Fe set-up, with ties to Baltimore & Ohio and Southern Pacific. The Rockefellers have a share in the Morgan-run New York Central and are also tied in with Southern Pacific. The Mellons participate in the rail empire through their ties with the Penn RR Corp. In addition to these three groups, who with the banking firm of Kuhn, Loeb & Co., have a stranglehold on the six rail super-trusts, there are the Harriman interests still powerful in the Union Pacific. Ironically enough, the railways are exempt by the Bulwinkle law from so-called “anti-trust” legislation.
As if to leave no doubt whatever about the identity of those who really own and run this country, the monopolists have since 1940 invaded fields hitherto relatively immune from monopoly control. This latest “merger movement” has not only extended to practically “all phases of manufacturing and mining but according to the FTC has been most conspicuous in such industries as food and beverages, textiles and apparel, and chemicals (including drugs). Together these three groups accounted for over one-third of the total number of acquisitions since 1940.” (The Magazine of Wall Street, Sept. 11, 1948.)
To explain how much the giant monopolies have grabbed in the last few years, separate and apart from the hundreds of billions already in their pockets, we yield the floor to Dr. John M. Blair, Federal Trade Commission economist. Since 1940, he stated, “mergers have caused the disappearance of 2,500 independent businesses” whose assets “gobbled up in the mergers total $5,200,000,000.” (UP Washington dispatch, April 11.)
There is only one way for monopolies to grow, and that is at the expense of smaller enterprises. The trend is as inexorable as the movement of the tides. Unless monopolies are abolished, they will in the end own everything in sight worth owning. The cited facts and figures show that our country is already not so very far removed from this intolerable state of affairs. For many, many years now the mass of the people have been paying tribute to the plutocrats every hour of their living day and this literally from the cradle to the grave.   
The Ancient Hoax of Trust-Busting The anti-monopoly fight in this country has been and remains a sham and a fraud. The Truman administration is currently engaged in what is publicized as “one of the most vigorous anti-monopoly campaigns” in the history of the Justice Department. Among the proclaimed aims of this campaign is, to “divorce American Telephone & Telegraph Co. (one of the pillars of the Morgan-controlled Bell System) from its wholly owned manufacturing subsidiary, Western Electric, and split the latter into three competing concerns.” The Big Four meat packers are to be split “into 14 separate and competing companies”; the Mellon aluminum trust is to be forced “to dispose of plants and properties under a 1945 court decision.” The du Ponts are going to be asked to “sell such of its cellophane plants as may be necessary to permit competitors to, enter the field.” And so forth and so on.
It is only necessary to recall that such measure: as subdivision are not an obstacle, but, on the contrary, an aid to centralization. This has been demonstrated time and again, especially in the case of Rockefeller’s oil trust. “Sub-divided” years ago in order “to permit competition,” Standard Oil is now the unchallenged ruler of the oil industry at home, and by the same token, throughout the world.
The deception and hypocrisy of the Truman Democrats and of Truman himself is aptly exposed by Edward H. Collins, financial editor of the authoritative New York Times. His target was Senator Paul H. Douglas of Illinois who recently made a plea in Cleveland for the government “to break up the business monopolies of the nation” which are “destroying free enterprise.” Collins’ reply (NY Times, June 20) is rather lengthy, but it sums up the whole situation:
Now, the monopoly issue isn’t funny. It isn’t a subject to be dismissed flippantly by anyone, especially by those who sincerely believe in the preservation of the system of private enterprise. There is no intention here of suggesting in any way that the problem doesn’t exist or that every effort should not be made to solve or ameliorate it. On the other hand, it does seem to this writer that these running and highly unspecified and UEW supported attacks on some mysterious economic Evil called Business Monopoly are getting pretty tiresome, and that in certain aspects they invite very pointed comment.
In the first place, the political party, which Professor Douglas represents in Congress has dominated the government in Washington now since 1933, or for some sixteen years. If, as the Senator from Illinois says, monopoly has been on the rise in recent years, then isn’t this a direct indictment of his own party? That party, has not only sought to make “Monopoly” the villain every time the national economy has left, or threatened to leave the rails; it conducted with what was supposed to have an Investigation to End All Investigations of the alleged evil in the T.N.E.C. inquiry of 1938, and it is spending more money than any previous government ever spent in tracking down monopoly wherever it has come on the latter’s trail, or thought it has.
The simple truth is that if monopoly is on the increase—as we are constantly being told by Democratic statesmen — there is abundant reason for suspecting that this is not in spite of, but because of, the Government’s own policies.
Mr. Collins’ remarks to the effect that the existence and overbearing power of “Business Monopoly” is simply another devil myth—“some mysterious economic Evil,” as he puts it—is so much piffle. But his conclusion that monopoly growth has been vastly promoted by the policies of the Truman administration and before it by those of Roosevelt is absolutely irrefutable. On the other hand, Collins’ implication that the Democratic Party alone bears the responsibility is quite unfounded. Theodore Roosevelt, a Republican, was the first “trust-buster” in the White House; the monopolies were bigger and more entrenched when his term expired.
The government has been, as it remains, nothing but a pliant tool of the monopolists whichever of the two major political parties happened to be in power. Since the close of the last century, monopolies have luxuriated under each and every administration, Republican and Democratic alike. And taking this period as a whole, the Republicans have been in power longer than the Democrats. In brief, both are equally to blame.
Overriding this crucially important political factor is the even more important economic factor. Concentration of wealth, elimination of small and middle-sized business through absorption into large-scale units and the consequent growth of monopolies—all this is the inexorable outcome of capitalist development. “Free enterprise” gives birth to monopoly as normally as senility causes arteries to harden.
At a certain stage capitalism can continue to exist only as monopoly capital. Among the most reactionary of utopias is the proposal to “return” to the days of unhampered competition via “breaking up” the monopolies. It is a wishful hope for a past that has gone beyond recall. Like all unattainable proposals, it simply plays into the hands of monopolies, clearing the road for their further growth and entrenchment. The socialist solution and no other is capable of rescuing the American people from the blind alley into which the monopolists have driven our economic life and by that token our whole social existence.
In the Fabulous Twenties when the Sixty Families ran and ruled this country through their 20 super-monopolies and a supplementary network of smaller corporation—some 200 in number—they proved incapable of keeping on an even keel an economy operating annually on a 100 billion dollar basis. Instead they plunged our people into the economic debacle of the Thirties and then into World War II.
Today, our economy has passed the quarter of a trillion mark. The same creatures, through 56 super-monopolies and a supplementary network totaling not more than 11.3 enterprises, are again plunging our people into still another economic catastrophe, as a preparation, if they have their way, for still another world war which our civilization may never survive.
Modern technology, modern large-scale production are far too complex, far too closely integrated, far too interdependent on a world scale to be run efficiently for the private profit of rival gangs, of multimillionaires. But they will have it run no other way. That is why it is imperative to run them and their system of super-monopolies completely out of the picture.
Monopolistic capitalism is by its very nature a rotting organism. It aggravates every feature of capitalist anarchy. It digs an impassable abyss between a tiny minority of the rich and the mass of the people.   
The Abyss Between Wealth and Poverty To illustrate. In 1929, at the peak of prosperity, 36,000 families had the same income as 11 million “lower-bracket” families. In the intervening years, this situation has worsened. Not so long ago, the Brookings Institution, a rabidly pro-capitalist body, calculated that one-tenth of 1 percent of our “top families” receive substantially as much as the total income of 42 percent of the families “at the bottom”; and, furthermore, that not less than 60 percent of American families received incomes insufficient to supply the basic necessities of life. For good measure, this Institution went on to add that the wealthy 10 percent of our population saved 86 percent of “the nation’s savings” while the “poorest 80 percent was able to save “but 2 percent of the total.” How could it be otherwise, in the light of facts and figures we have already cited?
With almost two-thirds of our families admittedly kept on a level where they cannot afford basic necessities, how is it possible for the internal market to absorb the huge output of our industries? The answer is, of course, that it is impossible. And so, our native plutocrats, like their European predecessors who are pigmies by comparison, are driven to seek outlets abroad for their products, for their idle capital, for their colossal profits.
They are impelled outwardly by their equally urgent need to control every step of production from supplies of raw material to arenas of marketing. And since this country itself constitutes the largest single market in the world of capitalism, they are driven to subjugate the world, economically and politically, in order to safeguard their position at home against the incursion of any combination of rivals abroad.
In this regard, the American monopolists have been outspoken to the point of brazenness. In 1918 the Webb-Pomerene Act was passed permitting monopoly combinations for purposes of foreign trade. Agreements with foreign syndicates and cartels were declared permissible, desirable and indispensable, above all, that is, for establishing home market controls.   
“We Divided Up the World” This was publicly affirmed in the course of the 1938 TNEC hearings where one authoritative representative of America’s super-billionaires explained: “We divided up the world and said that this part of the world is American influence ... The rest of the world came under European influence.” (TNEC Hearings, Part 5A, p.2385.)
Their European rivals may not have done too well under the agreements “in their own domestic markets,” but the US Steel monopolists did very well indeed. That protection of the American market was a major consideration in their dealings with foreign cartels is further confirmed by a letter of another authoritative representative of the Association who warned his colleagues that failure to reach a new agreement “would probably result in foreign makers attempting to share in the large and relatively high-priced American domestic market.” (p.10948.)
This case history of the Steel Association brings sharply into focus a new contradiction in the history of imperialism. America is impelled to world hegemony not only in search of trade and investment outlets, for which, like its rivals, it must engage in fierce commercial wars. In addition, however, the American imperialists must protect from “invasion by foreigners” their own home market which owing to its importance, size and relatively high prices is vulnerable to penetration by competitors. Tariffs alone do not suffice to assure such protection.
America must invade the economies of its competitors, shackling them by loans, imposing currency controls, dictating international cartel agreements. By means of these and similar measures it is possible to limit their development and influence, thereby incapacitating them on the arena of world competition and rendering them impotent to penetrate the American market. Thus our native monopolists are forced to “organize” the world, i.e., dominate it, not alone for urgent reasons of expansion but also for no less urgent reasons of “self-defense.”
The multibillionaires, moreover, cannot be content with staying put at home. They are driven outward and onward by the very same factors that make it impossible for the bulk of the American people to purchase elementary necessities. What cannot be sold at home must be sold abroad at all costs, and especially at a profit. What is even more important, capital which cannot be realized at home must find outlets elsewhere, and at rates that will make up for constricting output and sales.
The more monopoly decays, the more parasitic it becomes, all the greater is its drive for super-profits. These can be gleaned only in the colonies. And for the American super-monopolies nothing else will suffice than the reduction of our whole planet to the status of a colonial adjunct of their empire at home.   
Truman’s Famous Point Four Of course, this vast imperialist enterprise is being depicted as a generous contribution to the development of the “backward areas” of the world. Lack of space prohibits our dealing with this question comprehensively. But whatever the immediate interests of this or that capitalist group served by such a program, industrialization of other countries conflicts with the fundamental and long-range interests of monopoly capital and would tend:
 to restrict still further available reserves and raw materials; to reduce the possibility for exports of manufactured goods; to narrow still further outlets for investment of American capital; to create new rivals in a constricting world market, and in particular in American imperialism’s own home market; to sharply cut down imperialist super-profits; to increase the resistance to imperialist domination and penetration in proportion as the given areas are industrialized.  These weighty considerations are by no means the only ones. (There are in addition the political consequences of industrialization, with its growth of the native proletariat and the consequent sharpening of the class struggle in the retarded areas.) These considerations, we repeat, are weighty enough to exclude any such course for the American imperialists.
If there were no other facts than the record of the much-touted Marshall Plan, later relabeled ECA, its most recent consequences in Europe would suffice to show how inimical to the welfare of all peoples the policies of American imperialism actually are. Far from being a humanitarian, even altruistic, project as has been claimed, the ECA is a coldly calculated scheme to prop up European capitalism, render it completely subservient to America’s Sixty Families, place it on rigid doles in the world capitalist economy in order to convert it, at a later stage and under favorable circumstances, into a drill ground for the next world holocaust.
The projected program for the “backward areas”—Truman’s “Point Four”—pursues the same aims, within much narrower limits so far as actual expenditures are concerned. By means of grandiose promises and relatively piddling sums, the aim of “Point Four” is to open up all “backward areas” in Latin America, in Africa and in the Far East to the penetration of the American super-monopolies and their complete subjugation to the yoke of the Yankee multimillionaires. Again, the strategic aim in view is to line them up politically and economically for Wall Street’s contemplated assault upon the Soviet Union.
To sum up. The economic roots of US imperialism are deep in the rotting structure of super-monopoly capital. To survive, the monopolists need as authoritarian a government as possible at home in order to crush the peoples throughout the world. Fascism or some other form of dictatorship and war of atomic annihilation—that is the last word in the death agony of monopolistic capital.
 
Footnote 1. The Texas Corp. is tied in with the Cont. Ill. Bank & Trust Co. of Chicago, the Fisher family of General Motors and the Morgan-controlled Central Hanover Bank & Trust Co. of NY. In other words, it is no more “independent” than the others.




With the official registration of candidates “elected” to run for the Supreme Soviet, Stalin has stripped his plebiscite of all the ornaments and pretences that have hitherto adorned it. In the first place, the elections will be uncontested. That is to say in 99% of the electoral districts, if not in all of them, only one candidate will run. In his graciously worded dispatch to the N.Y. Times, Denny ventures to guess that in a few isolated instances, more than one candidate may perhaps appear on the ballot. That still remains to be seen Thus far, there has not been any official notice of a “contested” election in the Soviet press. From the data already available, the possibility of such elections being held is reduced to a dozen or so districts still to be heard from.
A breakdown of the candidates already registered, and in effect, already “elected”, reveals that among them there is not a single rank-and-file worker or peasant. The candidates have been hand-picked exclusively from among the ruling tops in the party and government and from among the new aristocracy of Stakhanovists and “well-to-do” kolkhozniki, and the Stalinist “intelligentsia”.
 

Breakdown of Candidates’ List



1)


  


Party and government functionaries


  


138


  


41 + %




2)


Army, Navy, Air Corps officers


  37


11 + %




3)


G.P.U.


  18


  5 + %




4)


Stakhanovists etc.


  50


15 + %




5)


Kolkhoz aristocracy


  55


16 + %




6)


“Intellectuals”


  21


  6 + %




 


Total


319


96 + %



The remaining 12 candidates are “miscellaneous”, i.e., they may be assigned to any one of the last four groups. It goes without saying that a few among those listed in groups 4, 5, and 6 may be party member. But these figures constitute incontestable proof that the “non-party Bolsheviks” compose in point of number a bloc as large as that of the “party Bolsheviks”, with the G.P.U. and the military-functionaries holding the “majority” in a bloc with either one of these two groups – an item which may prove of decisive significance in future developments. In our previous comments we had forecasted that the mechanics of the election would reveal Stalin’s plan to shift his base from his previous supporters in the old bureaucracy to a new “base”. In the above data, we observe the concrete realization of this plan. It is further to be borne in mind that Stalin has in addition “renovated” thoroughly his old “Bolshevik” base. Many of the “party” candidates appear in the lists with a significant notation that this or that candidate is “fulfilling the duties” of this or that party or Soviet functionary, i.e., the original incumbent had been purged, and a “substitute” appointed at the very last moment without even the formalities having been observed.
 

Fear Boycott of Elections
One should imagine that with a set-up such as Stalin has engineered, there is nothing for him to worry about. Yet the press continues to be filled with “alarm signals” that the “class enemy” will attempt to “disrupt” the elections, and “do dirt”. Says Pravda: “It is impermissible to forget that the good nature and dopiness of several party and Soviet organizations is being utilized by enemy elements who are attempting and will continue to attempt in every way imaginable to do us dirt in the election campaign”. (Nov. 15) This enigmatic language covers up the mortal fear of the ruling clique of a boycott of the elections. According to the provisions of the constitution each candidate must poll over one-half of the votes in his district to be elected.. Should the voters stay away from the polls, or should they pursue the less dangerous course of going to the polls, and “scratching the lone delegate, a very compromising situation would ensue. Pencils are no longer necessary in Stalin’s election. But every man with a pencil is a potential threat. The dread of this possibility crops out in the campaign to turn out 100% of the votes; and much more directly in the speeches of the dignitaries themselves. Thus Kossarev a member of the Central Electoral Committee, recently issued an appeal to the youth regarding their role in the elections. He stressed their duty to expose and agitate against the enemy elements, and he indicated three infallible signs whereby any dutiful youth could immediately discover elements “hostile to the Soviet system, and the Communist Party”. We list them, as given by Kossarev: (1) Those who attempt to “talk the populace out of active participation in the elections” (i.e. the advocates of boycott!) (2) those who “attempt to put forward their own hostile candidates”; (3) those who “spread anti-Soviet anecdotes” and generally “carry on hostile agitation.” Where? “Sometimes,” says Kossarev cautiously, “even at political meetings,” but as [a] rule, he continues “in stores, baths, barber shops, street cars, layers of movie houses, bazars and houses of prayer.”
 

Diplomats in Grip of Purge
With the latest purge of the Soviet consulate in China, the list of foreign offices thus far affected now includes: Germany, Poland (Davtyan), Lithuania (Podolsky); Finland (Asmus); Latvia (Brodovsky); Esthonia (Ustinov – he committed suicide) and Spain (Antonov-Ovseyenko). While the head of the English embassy, Maisky is still intact, his staff has been riddled. A. Shuster, one of the embassy’s secretaries is being held in Russia. The naval attaché, Antipo-Chikunsky; the military attachés A.K. Sirkov, and Ivan Cherny have been “recalled.” Sirkov and Cherny were appointed in Putna’s place. The arrest of Yureney, one of Litvinov’s most intimate friends raises of course the question of Litvinov’s impending demise. A persistent rumor is circulating in the European press that a Moscow trial of ambassadors is now in preparation.
It is said that Yurenev, Karsky, Krestinsky and Antonov-Ovseyenko have already “confessed.”
 




The third Conference of the Austrian Revolutionary Socialists was held in October. While complete account of the proceedings at this Conference has not yet reached us, the material at hand is sufficient to characterise the political platform under which the shattered ranks of Austrian social democracy are seeking to rally the working class movement, there. The Austrian “Revolutionary Socialists” are pursuing a centrist course. The chief document issuing: from the Conference is a Manifesto to the Austrian workers. The Manifesto, after criticizing the sham of bourgeois democracy, goes on to say: “Only a socialist struggle for emancipation on the part of the toiling masses can liberate Austria from the yoke of National-Socialism (Fascism)”. The manner in which the Austrian Revolutionary Socialists propose to wage this emancipatory struggle may be gathered from the Resolution on party tactics which was adopted.
The Conference placed itself on record against the Stalinist “illusions”. The chief point of criticism being that under the slogan of the “People’s Front” or the “Democratic Republic” the Stalinists turn with proposals of alliance to all kinds of groupings, “down to uninfluential groups in reactionary camp.” Instead of a forthright condemnation of the “People’s Front” policies and of Stalinism, the resolution on party tactics confines itself to a declaration that the “Party struggles for political freedom and considers the immediate task of this struggle to be the re-establishment of the organizational freedom of the labor movement. The party combines this struggle with the struggle for the economic and social demands of the masses.”
It is hardly necessary for us to delineate the course pursued by the Stalinists in Austria. Suffice it to say that the Stalinists in Austria as elsewhere demanded, as an integral part of the People’s Front betrayal, complete solidarity on the part of the Austrian Socialists with the Moscow frame-up ... which proved a bit too much too swallow. The Conference complained of the “disruptive tactics” of the Stalinists, placed the blame for the break-up of the united front on the C.P., and then proceeded to “empower the Central Committee to initiate steps aiming to convince the C.P. of the ruinousness and worthlessness of its present tactics and urge the C.P. to cease its struggle against the Revolutionary Socialists so that the existing unity of action its not destroyed but rather made firmer and more effective in the interests of the socialist struggle for emancipation and against the Fascist dictatorship.”
The Austrian Revolutionary Socialists claim to be the partisans of the dictatorship of the proletariat. If they persist much longer in the conciliatory, not to say grovelling, attitude towards Stalinism, they will at best only repeat the tragic experience of the Anarchists and the POUM in Spain. The first condition for revolutionary action is to cherish no illusions about Stalinism but to brand it for what it is: the most dangerous and corrupt enemy of the working class movement.
 

Esthonian Social Democrats Reform Ranks For a People’s Front
In 1934 the Esthonian S.P. split into three sections. In September 1936 negotiations for unity were initiated. One year later, in September 1937 two of the sections reached a final agreement to fuse, in order to lay a basis for a “People’s Front.” The newly fused organization declared itself against any united front action with the Stalinists. But “recognizing that the Soviet Union is one of the main bulwarks of peace”, the Esthonian social patriots, pledged themselves not to “attack” either the Stalin regime in Russia or the C.P. in particular. Needless to say the Stalinists will not take kindly to this offer of “non-aggression”, which is in essence similar to the attitude of the Austrian Socialists.
 

Former Head of Swiss Stalinists “Exposes” Stalin
Berner Tagwacht, organ of Swiss social democrats has printed the revelations of Walter Bringolf, former leader of the Swiss S.P., and follower of Brandler, who had broken some time ago with the Comintern. Citations from these articles have been widely reprinted, among others by the Russian Mensheviks (Sots. Vestnik, Nov. 30, 1937). Bringolf deals primarily with the behind-the-scenes struggle between Stalin and the opposition in Russia. He does not specify the source of his information, but in the status of an “old Bolshevik” asserts that the idea of the New Constitution originated among the Red Army tops, as part of a campaign to bring the regime closer in line with the demands of the expanding production in Russia. It was the plan of this opposition headed by Red Army generals to retire Stalin either by assigning him to some sinecure or by altogether removing him from the political arena. Stalin pretended to go along, and then assumed the offensive. The “inside” story of Yagoda’s downfall, to believe Bringolf, is as follows:
“Yagoda had always been personally tied to Stalin and absolutely devoted to him. Back at the time of the first trial against the opposition (Zinoviev, Kamenev), Yagoda went along with Stalin without any reservations. But following this trial some sort of inner conflict seized Yagoda. The thing is that in connection with this trial, a memorandum was handed to the Central Committee of the party, signed by 2,000 old Bolsheviks and decisively condemning Stalin’s methods. Among the signatories were a good many of Yagoda’s old friends and comrades-in-arms. Confronted with the necessity of applying harsh measures against those whose names adorned the memorandum, Yagoda wavered. This was his undoing. The avenging hand of Stalin descended on Yagoda himself.”
Bringolf considers Bluecher’s conduct of especial interest. “General Bluecher was taken by everybody for an oppositionist. And there is no doubt that in the main Bluecher was in agreement with those of his comrades in the Red Army who were shot.”
 




Rumors that the Franco-Soviet pact is about to be scrapped have been revived of late. The “democratic” European press keeps stressing the growing isolation of the Soviet Union. British diplomacy has been particularly active in recent days in pointing out that there are no insurmountable barriers to divide the imperialist camp into two irreconcilable wings, i.e., peace-loving “democratic” states, versus the bellicose Fascist states. The official and “unofficial” visits paid to Hitler by British statesmen are indications of a similar trend. A curious incident that occurred toward the end of last month may be directly connected with these maneuvers to “reconcile” the existing antagonisms.
The Paris correspondent of one of Mussolini’s newspapers sent in a dispatch on the desirability of establishing a Franco-Italian rapprochement. It was published in Tribuna. The issue in which this article appeared was thereupon confiscated, and the correspondent recalled. The official explanation was that this correspondent had merely expressed his “personal” opinion. It is of course no secret that no “personal” opinions are permitted to slip into the rigidly censored Fascist press. In any case, Mussolini is “unofficially” on record as ready for “reconciliation”.
* * *

Journal des Nations, the “organ” of the League of Nations published in Geneva hardly carries any news about the Soviet Union. An occasional brief notice may appear from time to time dwelling on some latest “achievement”. Not a word about the purge, the “trials” etc. On the other hand, it carries perhaps the most detailed accounts outside the Comintern press of the activities of the Stalinists, especially with regard to France and Spain.
Thus, Journal des Nations devoted several issues to reports of the recent plenum of the Spanish Communist Party, giving considerable space to the speeches made there, and in particular to the oration made by M. Anton “the political Commissar of the Central Front.” M. Anton, we are informed by the Journal, devoted his entire speech to “showing the relations between the Trotskyites and the Fascists, between the members of the P.O.U.M. and the partisans of Franco.’’ There follows an extract from his speech: “The struggle against Trotskyism,” he declared, “is not a question which solely concerns the Communists, but is the struggle of the Spanish people as a whole. That is why we want to denounce the peril that, is constituted by the Trotskyite elements”. (Journal des Nations, Nov. 19, 1937.)
The French newspapers, however, devote a great deal of attention to the purge. Matin, for example, insists that the Red Army is undergoing another “cleansing;” Haras Agency has been circulating “unverified reports” that many army divisions are now being headed by officers of subordinate rank. Matin likewise reports the rumored suicide of Postyshev, and the arrest of Victor Keen, editor-in-chief of Journal de Moscou and former Tass correspondent in Rome and Paris.
In the Soviet Union there are 33 republics, of which 22 are autonomous and 11 “independent” Soviet entities. No other sphere appears to have been more thoroughly purged than the administrative machinery of these republics. The hands of the executioner reached even into Biro-Bidjan where the Jewish party heads, Professor Lieberberg, Chafkin and several others were arrested as “sabotagers, bourgeois-nationalists—and Japanese spies”. These men had been credited officially as the “builders of Biro-Bidjan”.
Latest dispatches leave no room for doubt that the republics are being “re-purged”. Thus, in the Ukraine where Lubchenko, the Chairman of the Ukrainian Soviet Government, committed suicide on Aug. 30, and the secretary of the party Popov was arrested as a “Trotskyite”, the newly appointed Chairman of the Government, Bondarenko, also “committed suicide.” In White Russia, Cherviakov, the President of the Republic, committed suicide, and the Chairman of the Soviets and the secretary of the party were arrested. In Tadjikistan, Muksumov and Bobokalov, the successors of Rakhimbayev, the Premier, and Shotemir, the President, were arrested on September 21st. The Kirghiz Republic had been purged, but again the Chairman Isakeyev and others who had replaced the the “spies and traitors” were themselves purged. On Nov. 20, there was reported another “plot” in Uzbekistan. Seven “plotters” were shot. Among them the head of the C.P., Kaipov.
Writing in the Manchester Guardian on this aspect of Stalin’s blood purge, Dr. J.N. Steinberg comments as follows: “It is impossible to believe that in all the national states states simultaneously all the most important leaders should be nothing but political and moral criminals. This mass campaign seems to be intended to clear the way for a purely Russian national state.” (Manchester Guardian Weekly, November 5).
To demonstrate to the world how securely he sits in the Kremlin, Stalin promised to free 15,000 political prisoners on the XX anniversary of the October revolution. But, of course, they remained in jail and in the concentration camps.
 




Stalin Elects Himself
The elections in Russia are over – “officially”. As was guaranteed in advance, 100% of the voters turned out “unanimously” to elect Stalin and 1,142 other members of the Supreme Council (569 for the Council of the Union and 574 for the Council of Nationalities), i.e., 1,142 stooges for Stalin.
 

Advised Ballots Be Signed
In addition to the previous vast mobilization of the apparatus, from the 900,000 school teachers down to all school children of “pioneer age”, more than 1,000,000 “agitators”’ were sent out to the rural districts and 2,000,000 “volunteers” (as proudly reported by the Daily Worker for Dec. 13) assisted the G.P.U. in driving the people to the polls. The Soviet citizen in these elections had the choice between either showing up at the polls or explaining to the G.P.U. his failure to vote for Stalin. While the Stalin press cynically kept up the sham of the “secret” ballot – Pravda insisted, if you please, that unless the ballot was sealed it would be invalid – it at the same time made it quite clear to the citizens that they had better have iron-clad proof of having voted, suggesting, in fact, that they sign their names to the ballot, thus placing the illiterates on the spot.
Sender Garlin reports in the Daily Worker that “Children refused to stay at home and insisted on accompanying their parents to the polls.” Apart from the fact that the absence of a schoolchild (previously “mobilized” for the campaign) would have to be explained by the parents, the presence of children constituted an additional proof that the parents had not been remiss in their duties.
 

Voting “Safe-Guarded”
Detail after detail provides proof of the vast reign of terror under which the elections were held. “Virtually nothing was allowed to interfere with the sacred right of all Soviet citizens to vote. People voted in home districts, in sanatoriums and vacationing places, on battleships on the Red Fleet and on trains which sped over the rolling steppes of Russia”, howls the Daily Worker. Even being sick in bed was no excuse for failure to vote. A Soviet citizen could provide against such contingency either like Stanislavsky, “the venerable director of Moscow’s history-making theatre”, by making an official request “to be permitted to vote at home, or, if he happened not to be a dignitary, by applying for one of “the fleet of cars placed at the disposal of aged and invalid voters to drive them to and from the polls.” (D.W., Dec. 13) It is hardly to be wondered at that many harrassed functionaries, seeking to safeguard themselves against corpses being suddenly resurrected or possible errors in documentation, placed on the rolls the names of people recently deceased, and of new born babes, to save nothing of the feeble-minded and the insane. (See Pravda for Nov. 25).
From the pages of the official Stalin press, it is quite apparent that toward the latter stages of the election campaign, particularly when it became clear that only those handpicked by Stalin would be placed on the ballot, a serious apathy, to put it mildly, set in among the “activists” engaged in organizing the elections. Thus, Pravda for November 25, after giving a glowing account of the progress of the campaign, comments cautiously: “However many party and trade union organizations, city and district Soviets forget about the organizational and technical preparation for the elections.”
* * *
The drive against the “enemies of the people” has not abated and it is certain that far from slackening it will gather in momentum especially in the coming days before the convocation of the Supreme Council “sometime in January”.
 

Last Minute Changes in Ballot
To the long list of Soviet embassies that are being purged, should be added the personnel of the Tokio embassy, the majority of whom have been “recalled.” Rumours will not down of a pending trial of no less than 15 Soviet diplomats – on the charge of “Trotskyism.” A purge, the scope of which will become clear only when the complete list of candidates is finally made public, is taking place even among the newly “elected” deputies. To the names of Postyshev, formerly of the Political Bureau, and Mezhlauk, who replaced Ordjonikidze as the head of Heavy Industry, and both of whom were previously removed from the roll of candidates, Stalin has now added the names of General Alksnis and General Bokis, head of the Air and Tanks Corps respectively. Alksnis was among those who sent Tukhachevsky and others to the executioner’s block.
So brazen is the work of the frame-up artists that even the pages of Izvestia had to be devoted to the “exposure” of one over-zealous individual. The editor of Russian Art has been fulminating against the staff of another Soviet publication Theatre as guilty of every kind of anti-Soviet crime, up to and including “Trotskyism”. Simultaneously, the editor of Theatre has been conducting the same sort of campaign against the staff of Russian Art. The “scandal” comprises the fact that one and the same individual, I. Altman, is editor of Theatre while he also happens to be editor of Russian Art. The gentleman was playing safe. (See Izvestia for Nov. 24).
In every one of its aspects the “election” reflects the depraved and brutal regime of Stalin. To the long list of his judicial frame-ups, Stalin has merely added an electoral frame-up.
 




Stalin’s Purge of Blood, “At Home”
From day to day it become increasingly evident that a blood purge of unprecedented proportions is taking place in Russia, under the direct guidance of Stalin. All the proceeding purges pale to insignificance in comparison with the scope and depth of the current one. The chief target of the purge is once again the C.P.S.U., the Komsomol, and other organs of the “ruling party” and of the government. The purge extends not only to the G.P.U. and the Red Army, but even to the allegedly sacrosanct “Political Bureau.” So swift is the pace of the purge, that the purgers of yesterday are the “purged” of today, and the purgers of today – the “enemies of the people” on the morrow.
Neue Zuericher Zeitung computes that from the time of the Kamenev-Zinoviev trial in August 1936 up to the beginning of last October, that is, covering a period of more than 18 months, there was a public record of 808 executions in the USSR. The Havas agency computes on the basis of data from 20 provincial papers that 403 people have been executed by Stalin from September 5 to October 10 last.
That is to say, in a period of approximately one month as many have been shot as had been in the previous 17 months. The closer the “elections” the more ferocious the purge becomes! This “coincidence” imperiously poses the question as to the connection between the Moscow frame-ups and Stalin’s political goals within the USSR itself. In the recent period “public trials” of the Moscow variety have been taking place all over the Soviet territory. They receive no notice in Pravda, or other central publications of Stalin. Nor does the capitalist press devote much space to them, except to record them in the general tabulation of executions. They do receive notice in the Soviet provincial press.
Each province “has its own Piatakov” ... with the difference, that these “Piatakovs” are the very flower of Stalin’s supporters of yesterday: They are in effect the very men who helped Stalin “purge” the original “Piatakovs.” In many cases they were decorated only a short time ago for their “zeal” in rooting out the “enemies of the people”.
 

Baku “Kalinin” Liquidated
One such trial took place in Baku on October 31. Only three weeks before there had been a purge, the scope of which may be gleaned from the fact that the President of the Azarbeidjan Autonomous Republic (i.e. the Azarbeidjan “Kalinin’’) was “arrested” on the charge of “Trotskyism and Bukharinism.” Ten out of the fourteen accused in the Baku “trial” are prominent members of the C.P. Nine of them are over 40 – a significant item, indicating that these are not “recent” henchmen of Stalin. Among these ex-dignitaries was Muzabekov, Chairman of the CEC of the Soviets.
Almost simultaneously with the trial in Baku came news of an “Abkhasian plot” (November 9) involving the heads of the Abkhazian G.P.U., Mikeladze and Ampar; People’s Commissar of Agriculture, Chalmatz; Director of the Tobacco Administration, Mikhail Lakoba; Director of the Azneft, Vassilii Lakoba together with the secretary of the party organization, and the chairman of the party district committee. This trial was in every detail a replica of the Moscow frame-ups: “assassination plots,” sabotage, “link” with Trotsky-Serebriakov-Piatakov etc., and last but not least, “confessions” from all the accused.
 

“Suicides” Also Increase
On November 8 came a report in Krasnava Tataria of 14 “counter-revolutionists” shot – among them a secretary and chairman of the party committee, an editor of the newspaper, and several agronomists.
In Gomel on November 5, the military tribunal sentenced 8 to death, among them again high dignitaries; a former chairman of the Gomel Soviet; a high functionary in the People’s Commissariat of Health, etc.
This latest phase too has its “suicides”, most prominent among them being the suicide of Balitsky, head of the Ukrainian G.P.U. The “Yezhov” of the Ukraine figuring as a “Tomsky!” The pretexts for removal vary as they have in the past. Thus Rudzutak, a member of the Political Bureau whom we last reported as in “disgrace” has just been “arrested” on the charge – of “criminal negligence in the preparation of the Levanovsky flight.” Stalin still shies of accusing his closest henchmen of yesterday of – “Trotskyism.” In Ulan Ude, in Inner Mongolia – 16 have just been shot as “Japanese spies.”
The European capitalist press is extremely circumspect in dealing with these latest developments, which they are nevertheless following most closely. But occasionally the newspapers carry an item or two, revealing the actual tenor of the speculations of the bourgeoisie. Thus, Neue Zuericher Zeitung, in its October 19th issue, carries a long article on the coming Stalin elections which begins with the statement that the mere reading of the Soviet press “conveys the impression of extreme nervousness on the part of the manipulators of Russian home politics.” The writer even goes so far as to speculate whether the coming elections might not suffer the same fate as the widely publicized census of a short while ago, which, after a great deal of ballyhoo, was suddenly “postponed.” The internal difficulties Stalin is encountering on the path to his “coronation” are no secret to the ruling tops of the imperialist countries. And the latest maneuvers of English and French diplomacy with Hitler and Mussolini are undoubtedly closely linked with the latest developments in Stalin’s Russia.
 




Japanese Economy Crumbling Under War Strain
During the years of the last world crisis the weak sectors of Japanese economic structure were propped up through the advantages that Japan was able to gain in the world market in the cheapness of raw materials, outlets for its cheap exports and so on. Even at that period, however, the shaky financial position of Japan required a devaluation of the yen. The recent economic upswing and the general European rearmament competition which steeply forced up the prices of the basic raw materials have worked havoc with Japan.
The rise in prices on raw materials it must import has more than annulled the advantage of cheap labor. The cost of its rearmament program that has already-imposed a severe strain on the country’s resources has been more than doubled. For the past few years Japan’s export has barely covered two-thirds of the import. The costly Manchurian conquest, achieved with relative ease, has been followed by the far costlier campaign in North China. The price on rice, the basic foodstuff of the Japanese masses is the highest in a decade, and has been steadily rising. The peasantry long in an intolerable position is on the verge of despair because of the lack of goods and the steeply mounting prices. The budget calls for expenditures of 5% billion yens while the income is estimated at 1½ billion.
These ever-widening gaps and monstrous disproportions carry with them a threat of ruin for Japan. The foreign imperialist powers, whose interests are being encroached upon by the Japanese onslaught on China, are banking largely on economic difficulties to checkmate Japanese militarism. The European press, especially the British, is filled with speculations as to the possible effects of a lengthy Chinese resistance. The gravity of the situation is recognized and even openly discussed by Japanese newspapers as well.
The Manchester Guardian Weekly in its Oct. 22 issue carries a lengthy article on Japan, in which the main stress is laid precisely on this point. We cite a significant passage from it:
“Financial pages [of Japanese newspapers] contain serious discussions pointing out that the emergency appropriations up to December alone will be far more than the total cost of the Russo-Japanese War, even allowing for price changes, and that this is just a beginning. On the other hand no one is prepared to predict any collapse at present. There are rumors about restrictions on bank withdrawals, but nothing has been put into effect yet. Exchange control is becoming stricter and Japanese capital abroad is being mobilized. Domestic stocks have gone down rather heavily, and the Government is endeavoring to bolster up the market. Outside the munitions field businessmen are worried about the outlook, especially as regards raw materials.”
One of the conclusions that must be drawn from what has been said above is that Japanese militarism, faced with economic collapse, cannot withdraw now, but must plunge on with its plans of conquest, in the hope of thus averting an internal catastrophe.
The campaign against Russia is intensifying. Foreign correspondents report that large bodies of troops are being sent to Manchuria. Some even say that more soldiers are sent there than to Northern China, apparently in preparation for an onslaught on the Maritime Provinces. Says the Manchester Guardian: “The press is full everyday with reports of Russian activities in China, notably the dispatch of aeroplanes.”
 

Russian White Guards on the Class Nature of the Soviet Union
In its August 1937 issue Znamya Rossii, one of the most rabid counter-revolutionary periodicals published abroad, prints theses which attempt to draw the balance of the recent frame-up trials, the purge, and the ever-spreading campaign of terror.
Among other things, the theses state the following:
“Under the inescapable pressure of life itself, of the demands of foreign policy and the threat of war, the communist power was compelled to make numerous and important concessions, shifts, and retreats. All these changes, however, while providing some relief for the country, are inadequate; they are of a maneuvering and opportunist character, and incapable of reconciling the population with the power, and they do not alter the essence of the communist dictatorship.”
The conclusion drawn by the White Guards is that the foundations of the workers’ state have not been undermined sufficiently by Stalinism to enable the counter-revolution to hope for a peaceful triumph. An insurrection, at least a “palace revolution”, is required, in their opinion.
* * *
Orlov, head of the Soviet navy, has been “replaced.” Ivanov, the commander of the warship Marat, who was sent to the coronation of George VI, is among the “missing”.
* * *
Dubnov, one of the few remaining old-timers, has been removed from his post as Commissar of Education, and is now no doubt in jail.
* * *
Mugdussi, head of the Armenian G.P.U., who a short time ago was decorated by Yezhov himself with the highest honor, the Order of Lenin,, for his “zeal in prosecuting the enemies of the people’”, has himself been arrested as a “counter-revolutionist”.
 


 The attention of the whole world is today focussed upon the health of American economy. There is ample reason for this interest, for the future of world capitalism hinges upon the course of production in this country. The following questions are insistently raised. What is the present condition of US economy? In what direction is it heading? What are its prospects in the next immediate period? We propose to offer some answers to these questions.
The first signs that all was not well appeared toward the end of September 1946 in the sphere of distribution. Inventories of manufacturers, wholesalers and retailers began accumulating at the rate of a billion dollars a month; symptoms of the saturation of the internal market began to appear in retail sales. (For an analysis of this first stage of the downward economic cycle, the stage of the critical turning point in the boom, we refer the reader to the December 1946 issue of the Fourth International, and the article by Art Preis, Economic Trends in the United States, in the January 1947 issue.)   
A New Stage Begins Today these ominous signs are no longer confined to the sphere of distribution but have spread to the decisive sphere of production. The first thing to be noted is a decline in industrial output and factory employment, the first since the postwar boom got under way in September 1945. This decline set in toward the end of April. During the first quarter of this year—January-March — according to the adjusted index of the Federal Reserve Board, industrial output continued at its postwar peak level of 189; non-agricultural employment remained at 42½ million persons, while the army of unemployment hovered around the “prosperity normal” of 2½ million.
The change that occurred in April was by no means spectacular. By the beginning of May industrial output fell off two percentage points to 187; by the end of May it slid another two points to 185. The number of factories that cut back or suspended operations was likewise relatively small.
Hardest hit were the luxury trades (furs, jewelry) and the apparel and textile industries. Some 35-40 woolen mills out of several hundred in New England shut down, while others curtailed production. The slump in textiles spread to the South, with the most drastic curtailments coming in plush, upholstery, cotton hosiery, nylons and handkerchiefs. Similar conditions were noted in the leather and shoe industry.
In contrast to this drop in the non-durable or “soft goods” sector, production of durable consumer goods continued at a record breaking pace, although cutbacks in production also manifested themselves in such lines as lighting equipment, aluminum manufactures, radio and furniture. But this barely made a dent in durable manufactures which kept rolling along at a record pace of 225 per cent of the 1935-39 levels.
Heavy industry, steel, coal oil, likewise maintained their output, as did metallurgy as a whole. The lone cloud on the horizon was aluminum, the first major metal to be affected. The Reynolds Metal Co. shut down its Longview, Wash., plant (capacity 60 million pounds a year) and gave up the rod and bar mill which it had leased from the government. Alcoa reduced production in its Tennessee rolling mills.
At first glance, it would seem that with industrial production pouring out at this rate, American business has little to worry about. Yet, in the face of these figures, there is great concern throughout the business world about an imminent break in the economic situation. This apprehension is well-founded, for these very figures indicate that the peak of production has already been passed, that most of the factors imparting momentum to the postwar boom have spent themselves; and signs of the downward trend are multiplying.
Here we are seeing repeated the customary pattern of downward cycles in capitalist production, during which the soft goods sector is the first to buckle under. Meanwhile durable goods continue to maintain their former pace or even forge ahead temporarily—but only to decline far more sharply at the next phase.
But one unusual factor has intruded itself into the present phase. There has been a sudden and absolutely unexpected curtailment of the construction industry, the major sphere of capital investment. Construction is normally among the last to register declines from boom levels. This is a departure from the customary pattern of capitalist downward cycles.
This spring, during the peak season of the building industry, cutbacks have created a rather high rate of unemployment among construction workers, especially in the New York area, and shut down many small plants servicing this industry, among them 250 sawmills in Georgia and Alabama. We shall deal later with the significance of this phenomenon.
The relatively slight drop of four percentage points in industrial output from the middle of April to the end of May has, however, brought about a significant change in the amount of employment. While Washington has as yet released only scanty figures about the growth of unemployment in this period, the number of jobless is probably approaching the 5 million mark, i.e., it has doubled. Nationally the proportion of unemployed to employed is one to ten. In New York, according to a recently conducted poll, it is one to six; in some parts of the country it is probably higher.
Thus the first unmistakable signs of debility have already begun to appear in US economy. The question is: how serious is this condition and how rapidly will it develop?
The consensus of capitalist opinion continues highly optimistic. Thus the June 2 Journal of Commerce, an authoritative mouthpiece of Wall Street, consoles its readers with the forecast that these symptoms signify merely a trifling ailment, a “levelling off” rather than a “major depression.”
It would be instructive to analyze the arguments of capitalist commentators like the Journal of Commerce in favor of this rosy perspective, in order to see how solid a basis their optimism has.
They rest their case on three main considerations: (1) the sound condition of the domestic market; (2) the booming foreign trade; (3) the expansion of building. If these three conditions are present, then there is indeed ground for optimism. Let us see.
The Journal of Commerce backs up its contention that the domestic market is thriving by the argument that “consumer buying is maintained.” Is this actually so?
Exactly the reverse is true. Retail sales have been steadily falling off in dollars, just as, in the previous period, they had fallen off in physical volume. The dollar volume in retail sales has been kept up in the last period by increasing sales of durable goods which temporarily compensated for the declining sales of “soft goods.” Nevertheless an over-all drop has already begun. This can be seen from the comparative total sales of 296 largest department stores in the country, a key figure carefully compiled by the Federal Reserve Board. According to the May issue of the Federal Reserve Bulletin, these 296 stores sold in the first quarter of the current year a total of 838 million dollars, as against 859 million dollars in the same quarter of 1946, or a drop of 21 million dollars. This means that during the period of peak production and peak employment, the mass of the people were able to buy not more but less than they did the previous year.
This declining purchasing power of the masses produced even a sharper decline in the purchases of the stores themselves. We find that the outstanding orders of these 296 stores dropped almost by half in this same period as compared with 1946! While in March 1946 they ordered 971 million dollars worth of new goods, in March 1947 they placed orders for only 486 million dollars. At the same time retail inventories as a whole soared from 6.2 billion dollars in the first quarter of 1946 to 9.4 billion in 1947; with the inventories of the 296 department stores, leaping proportionately from 583 million dollars in March 1946 to 865 million dollars in March 1947.
What these figures prove irrefutably is that the domestic market tends to contract sharply. Workers have been able to buy less and less, while inventories of high-priced goods kept piling up. At the same time the stores themselves have bought less and less. If such was the trend during peak employment, how can it be expected to reverse itself in the face of rising unemployment and continued high prices? Instead of the trend being reversed, it must necessarily become more accentuated.
What measures have been proposed to remedy this serious situation? Alarmed by the reports of his economic advisers, President Truman has publicly urged a voluntary 10% over-all reduction in prices. There was plenty of ballyhoo around the proposal, but it fizzled. There have been no voluntary price reductions.   
Why Prices Stay Up It is not entirely out of malice or cunning that businessmen all talk about the need for cheaper goods, but do nothing about cutting prices. The manufacturers, wholesalers and retailers have now on their hands mountains of goods that already total close to 40 billion dollars. A ten per cent cut in these enormous inventories would mean an immediate loss of 4 billion dollars; a larger cut would mean a proportionately bigger loss.
The question staring them in the face is: Who shall take this loss? The wholesalers and retailers say—the manufacturers. But the latter are equally convinced that not they but the wholesalers and retailers must pay. While this muffled tug of war between the conflicting sections of the capitalists goes on—with each trying to save himself and let the devil take the hindmost—prices stay up, sales sag, inventories continue to accumulate. The disproportions between peak output and dwindling consuming power become ever more threatening.
What has happened during the spectacular splurge is that the domestic market has been ravaged by steep prices and fantastic profits of the monopolists. Big Business has proudly chalked up an extra 3 billion dollars in profits in the first quarter of 1946 (the 1946 rate of 12 odd billion dollars could not satiate them).
With the removal of all price controls and excess profits taxes, it has taken less than seven months—from October 1946 to April 1947 — for the capitalists to drive the economy from a condition of acute scarcities in virtually every sphere to conditions of glut, except for a few items. This has resulted in the first manifestations of overproduction and unemployment previously described.
This unbridled plundering of the people has gravely impaired their purchasing power, further undermining the domestic market. The most conservative estimates are that from 9 to 10 billion dollars in mass purchasing power were wiped out during the frenzied rise of prices and profits. In the process the meager war-time savings of the workers were swallowed up.
Under these circumstances, retail sales, an increasing proportion of which has consisted of durable goods, could be maintained in only one way, through the extension of consumer credit. This expedient has served to temporarily mask the dangerously impaired condition of the internal market.
Here are a few tell-tale figures, which bear today the aura of prosperity but which will on the morrow spell more cutbacks and shutdowns and more millions of unemployed.
By the end of April consumer credit rocketed to $10,256,000,000. Charge accounts rose to $2,782,000,000. Installment buying passed the billion dollar mark. This does not include automobiles sold on credit (such sales have reached three-quarters of a billion). We also omit mortgages on jerry-built homes, purchased by veterans and other homeless multitudes.
The bulk of these purchases are non-repeatable precisely because they represent purchases of durable goods. At the same time the debts incurred in making these purchases remain as the first charge against future income, leaving the debtors with proportionately less dollars with which to buy more goods.
It is clear that “consumer buying,” far from holding up, is bound to contract sharply in the next period in view of high prices, declining incomes, growing indebtedness and growing unemployment.
In the meantime the monopolists are not devising ways and means to restore or add purchasing power, but are doing everything in their power to maintain high prices and exorbitant profits.
From the standpoint of their immediate interests, they find it preferable to unload high-priced goods, hold down wages and cut-back production. At this stage of the downward economic cycle such a course will wreak greater havoc than was caused by the self-same policies at the peak of the boom.
The realistic perspective for the next immediate period therefore is this: with production, now that all the distribution channels have become clogged, heading downward, the domestic market must follow suit.
So much for Wall Street’s first source of solace.   
Foreign Trade Unable to find adequate outlets at home, can American business perhaps sustain itself by reliance on foreign markets? Here we come to the second argument in Wall Street’s arsenal. Pointing to the booming export trade, the highly optimistic editor of the Journal of Commerce says:
One of the strongest spots at the moment is export trade. Goods have been going out of the country at the annual rate of 16 billion dollars. This compares with earlier official estimates that we would sell abroad about 12 billion dollars of our goods, and actual exports last year of 9.7 billion dollars. For the time being these huge exports are quite a factor in sustaining business.
If the well-being of American economy depends primarily on what happens to its foreign trade, then the outlook is dark indeed. Before foreign trade can achieve any enduring stability, it is first necessary to stabilize capitalism in bankrupt Europe. For the past two years Washington has poured billions of dollars into Great Britain, France and Italy without noticeable improvement. These countries, along with Europe as a whole, continue to stagger from one economic crisis to another.
The subjective factors are now playing the decisive role there. For before Europe can be stabilized economically on a capitalist basis, it must be stabilized politically. But there is no short-term prospect for the realization of this goal. The greatest political convulsions lie not behind but ahead for Europe.
The situation in the Far East, the colonial heart of the world market, is no less unstable both politically and economically. China is torn by civil war. Indonesia and Indo-China are in revolt. India is on the brink of civil war. Prospects of political stability here, too, are rather dim.
On the other hand, those sectors in the Far East which have succeeded in registering a speedy economic recovery, now find that their own rapid progress is beginning to choke them. The rubber plantations, for example, have been restored more quickly than was anticipated. With what results? There is a rubber glut, the price of natural rubber is skidding. Australia and New Zealand have huge stocks of one of their chief products, wool. Their chief customer, the United States, already has a more than adequate supply on hand.
The Philippines are glutted with copra, so scarce only a few months ago. Coffee is again piling up in warehouses in Brazil. The Cuban sugar planters are wondering what to do with their record crops. These dislocations can only become more aggravated as world agriculture painfully climbs upward.
The policy followed by American businessmen on the foreign markets has not differed essentially from their economic policy at home. They have grabbed as much as they could as fast as they could. Soaring prices have slashed the purchasing power of foreign customers by half, by three times and more. The already acute shortage of dollars on the world market is being converted into a famine. This tends to cut down the markets for American exports.
Countries thus depleted of their gold and dollar reserves are compelled to retrench or see their fiscal systems topple. Rather than become hopelessly mortgaged to Wall Street, one country after another is being compelled in desperation to seek salvation by cutting down on American imports.
Still another factor undermining American foreign trade is the inability of the United States to buy anywhere near as much as it sells. As American exports boom, the gap between them and the imports keeps widening. At current levels there is a gap of almost 10 billion dollars between exports and imports.
But couldn’t this gap be bridged by huge government loans and gifts, as many sanguine businessmen believe? Even if this insurmountable problem were “solved” temporarily through such devices, export trade would at best play only a subsidiary part in sustaining American production. Today production is at a level of 210 billion dollars a year. Let us assume that foreign outlets are able to absorb as much as ten per cent of this total (a much higher figure than the current boom). The question still remains what to do with the remaining 90 per cent in view of the shrinking home market.
As a matter of fact, there is slim prospect of maintaining even the present rate of exports. The very same editorial writer who points so hopefully to the unparalleled export boom, is compelled immediately to add:
Now it is quite obvious that experts cannot continue at this rate, unprecedented in war or peace, much longer. The dollar shortage, becoming increasingly acute abroad, will automatically check this boom.
The one hope left is—a prolonged boom in construction. This is precisely why the unanticipated growing paralysis of the building industry is so ominous both with respect to short-term and long-term perspectives.
Former periods of peak production and peak prices have been accompanied by construction booms. This provides the main outlet for capital investment at home. Capitalist “savings,” that is, accumulated profits, are capitalized by conversion into new homes, office buildings, new plants, plant expansion and equipment. In 1946, capital investment in this field lagged badly behind, barely reaching the figure of nine billion dollars, approximately one-half the rate of the boom of the Twenties. At the same time, approximately two-thirds of capital investment in industry has gone not into construction but into equipment.   
The Lone Hope The bulk of capital investments, not less than 15 billion dollars, was diverted into inventories! Profits were lusher in speculation than in home building. That is why inventories, including plant equipment and building materials, continue to swell, while construction plans are shelved, home building is suspended and plants manufacturing lumber and building supplies are shut down.
This singular lag in capital investments in building during the peak of the boom is today being translated into a crisis in construction which coincides with the first cutbacks in industry.
Construction awards thus far in 1947, as reported by the Engineering News Record, the accepted authority in this field, have declined month by month both absolutely and relatively as compared with the 1946 rate. In New York, this agency estimated, there was a 65% drop as against 1946. In Chicago, a 32% dip. In Boston and Seattle construction was sliced almost in half. In Milwaukee and San Francisco by 40%; in Austin, Texas, again by half. This 22 city survey hardly leaves grounds for optimism in the building industry.
The housing authorities in Washington, who had promised that not less than one million new homes would go up in 1947, have scaled down their estimate by a quarter of a million.
Unless drastic measures are taken quickly, the bottom threatens to drop out of this key branch of economy. This may readily spell disaster, because construction as such is both an avenue for capital investment and a new source of purchasing power. Apart from the still prosperous agricultural sector, it constitutes the main potential source of new purchasing power in a shrinking domestic market. What happens in the sphere of construction will have considerable bearing on how rapidly and with what intensity the downward plunge of national economy will occur in the next period.
The prevalent opinion in capitalist circles is that the construction boom has simply been delayed by high prices and that once a price decline sets in, construction will quickly spurt forward. This happened after the crash of 1920-21, and they expect it to happen again.
Such a development in residential building is not excluded. But residential building is only part of a construction boom in general, and of the boom of the Twenties in particular. Without capital construction in industry, residential construction alone cannot maintain industry at high levels. This is admitted even among capitalist economists.
For example, The Twentieth Century Fund, in its just-published monumental volume of 875 pages, entitled America’s Needs and Resources, estimates that to keep economy operating at a level of 177 billion dollar “gross product” a capital investment of not less than 27.7 billion dollars is required. Of this total only 7.2 billion dollars is allotted to “consumer construction” or residential buildings while the rest must go into manufacturing, transportation, utilities and commerce.
But already in the last quarter of 1946 and the first quarter of 1947, the “gross national product” had surpassed the 200 billion dollar mark. Yet, capital investments in this same period were only a fraction of the sum estimated by the Century Fund. In other words, the productive facilities for such output, and an even larger one, already exist.   
The Construction Impasse This blocks off avenues for construction. Thus the Steel Trust has already cut down the larger productive capacity available during the war, because the steel kings see no possible outlet for more steel in the next period. The Electrical Trust likewise refuses to budge. The AT&T is deliberately promoting a telephone shortage for the same reason. In brief, most of the corporations are firmly convinced that their existing plant is more than adequate for their profitable markets. It is primarily for this reason that many construction plans have been shelved.
There is little likelihood that this situation will be reversed in the next period. Corporations that shelved projects in a period of high prices and high profits will hardly resume construction in a period of falling prices and lowered profits.
All indications thus far point to the prospect that capital investments in domestic industrial construction will be kept—as they have been—not at the maximum but at the barest minimum. Just the contrary situation existed in 1921.
This means that the short-term economic perspective is a bleak one. Having started downward, production will continue, with minor fluctuations, to decline.
The exact rate of this decline in the immediate period ahead cannot be determined in advance. Subjective factors play a decisive role here. The actual course which a depression may take at any given time-interval depends to a large extent on the interrelation between and the intervention of the decisive social forces, the basic classes, the ruling class on the one hand and the proletariat on the other.
The capitalist class does not sit passively by and await economic or political developments with folded arms. On the contrary, its agents intervene vigorously and consciously to serve its interests, well or poorly as the case may be. The workers, together with the mass of the people, likewise react to the changing economic situation either instinctively or consciously, depending on the strength of their organizations and their degree of political development. The interaction of these colliding forces causes fluctuations and modifications in the course of all social processes, including those in economic life.
Wall Street has mighty levers at its disposal, the government mechanism and its fiscal system together with its economic “regulators” — the various commodity markets, stock exchanges, the banks, the credit system and the like. While powerless to halt or reverse the basic economic processes, the bourgeoisie is nonetheless in a position, by manipulating these levers, to either retard or accelerate the decline.
Those who control this nation’s destinies have evidently not yet made up their minds about what lies ahead and what they should do. This is indicated by the uncertain behavior of their surest barometer, the Wall Street Stock market which for one whole year has been hovering around last year’s lows, unable to decide whether to sink through this “floor” or to shoot upward again. This expresses the genuine indecision of a class that dares not look economic reality fully in the face. The plutocrats have been proceeding from hand-to-mouth, meanwhile consoling themselves with wishful thinking.
The initial rate of decline averages up to now 2 per cent a month. If this is permitted to continue unchecked, it would mean a drop of about 25% in a year; it would be a catastrophe of major proportions.
A resumption of building on a large scale would cushion this decline for a more or less extended period of time but would not alter the basic downward trend. The next few months will tell the story here.
What form will the depression take? The best that the capitalist commentators themselves hope for is a repetition of the 1920-21 cycle, when the depression hit bottom and spent itself in the space of 18 months, and the economy then rebounded to new heights.
It is still too early to chart the exact form of what lies ahead. We already have a warning signal that customary patterns need not necessarily recur. This signal is the lag of capital investments during the boom and the current peculiar manifestations in the construction industry. These are symptoms of a system that has lost its vitality.
There are several possible variants. Barring a desperate plunge into war by the ruling class (as its sole way of “solving” the crisis) or the intervention of the proletarian revolution, among these variants is one that may combine many of the features of both the 1920-21 depression and the catastrophe that erupted in 1929. In the 1929 crisis economy declined steadily for four years before hitting bottom and was never able to recover to former levels. The current decline may ultimately drop to levels one-fifth to one-third below the postwar peaks, with a “normal” army of 8-10 million unemployed; production may then flatten out at these lower levels for a relatively extended period, only to slide downward again later on. Stabilization at levels within close proximity of those that prevail now is entirely out of the question. On the other hand, some phases of the downturn may prove to be more precipitate than either in 1920-21 or 1929-32. In addition, we repeat, there is a good reason for expecting a combination of developments that may assume entirely unexpected forms.
In any case, there is no ground whatever for confidence in the economic future of American capitalism.



The Fourth Five-Year Plan for Soviet agriculture, which officially went into effect in January 1946, has been scrapped by the Kremlin. While ostensibly the original Plan still remains in effect, it has now in reality been superseded by an emergency plan which specifically covers only three years, the current year, and the next two years, 1948 and 1949. This far-reaching change was made at the secret sessions of Plenum of the Central Committee of the Russian party held “sometime” in February in Moscow.
In decreeing this substitute plan for agriculture all of the constituted governmental bodies were by-passed. Measures of such scope are customarily presented in the name of the Gosplan (the State Planning Commission) and submitted to the Supreme Council for rubber-stamping. This procedure was arbitrarily dispensed with. Similarly ignored was the Council of Ministers in whose name all of the recent important economic decrees have been issued. The report to the Plenum, on the basis of which the emergency measures were adopted, was submitted not by Benediktov, the incumbent Minister of Agriculture, but by Andreyev, member of the Politbureau, who was appointed several months ago as head of the extraordinary “Board for Collective Farm Affairs.” (This Board has in effect supplanted the Ministry of Agriculture, which has now been reduced to a completely subordinate body.) It is noteworthy that Andreyev, who today plays so prominent a role in connection with “restoring” and “safeguarding” the collectives, was one of the key figures in the program of “wholesale collectivization” during the Thirties. The situation must be critical indeed for Stalin to skip over the entire elaborate state machinery through which he has operated in recent years!
The text of the decision adopted by the February Plenum entitled, On the Measures to Build Up Agriculture in the Post-War Period, was published in the columns of the press, with Pravda devoting to it practically its entire issue of February 28. This likewise marks a sharp departure from recent procedure: since the termination of hostilities, texts of all important economic decrees, especially those relating to agriculture, have been deliberately kept out of the press.
In addition, let us note, the text of the Plenum decision, which has the force of an emergency law, is far more informative than other similar documents have been, even though its statistical section remains, as usual, extremely hazy, designed to obscure rather than to reveal the actual state of affairs.
 
Rare Frankness
But what the Kremlin does not and cannot any longer hide are conditions in agriculture and the terrible impact of last year’s drouth that literally pose point-blank the question: Has Soviet agriculture collapsed as a direct consequence of the war and the 1946 famine crop?
In the light of admissions contained explicitly and implicitly in the new measures, it is hard to answer this question in the negative.
The Fourth Five-Year Plan set as its goal the expansion of the “total farm produce in the USSR,” by an over-all increase of 27 per cent by 1950, which requires an average annual increase of about 5 per cent over pre-war levels.
The new project postpones all talk of “surpassing” pre-war figures and instead designates the next three years – 1947, 1948 and 1949 – as the minimum period during which agriculture must be pulled-up to pre-war production. Assuming that this new target is achieved, this would leave only one year of the original Plan – 1950 – in which agriculture could conceivably be expanded beyond levels previously attained.
Analyzing the Fourth Five-Year Plan (see Fourth International, September 1946), we concluded:
“The claim that by 1950 the annual harvest will ‘be increased by 27 per cent above the 1940 figure’ is nothing less than fantastic.”
Now we report a claim by Stalin, even more fantastic in the light of the facts, namely, that this original goal can still be achieved not “by 1950” but solely and simply “in 1950.”
This shameless lie is uttered in the face of Stalin’s own acknowledgment that the best perspective he sees himself for Soviet agriculture is – a return to 1940 levels – by 1950! If a condition of agriculture that requires for its restoration virtually the entire period of a Five-Year Plan does not mean a breakdown, then what does it mean?
As a matter of fact, the text of the February 1947 Plenum resolution states that sown areas, crop yields, labor productivity, harvests, agricultural equipment, tractor personnel, and so on have dropped “considerably below pre-war” in every branch of agricultural production without exception – from grain and other cereals, through animal husbandry and fodder to industrial crops (cotton, sugar beet, flax fiber, etc.).
Just how far Soviet agriculture has declined since 1940, still remains a jealously guarded secret of the Kremlin. It is admitted, however, that there are acute shortages in draught animals, all types of cattle, all types of tools and machinery, especially tractors and combines, all types of fertilizer, skilled and unskilled labor, and everything else. It is admitted that only 75 per cent of the pre-war cultivated area in the devastated western provinces has thus far been replanted. It is further admitted that the “government uncovered major shortcomings” in Siberia, the Urals and Kazakhstan, the Eastern granary of the USSR (Pravda, April 6). The flax crop has been only half of what was anticipated. Cotton plantations in Central Asia were permitted to run to weeds, or converted into rice plantations. Similar conditions prevail in tobacco, sunflower seed, rubber-bearing plants, etc., etc.
That the decline has been nothing short of disastrous is corroborated by the involuntary admission that millions upon millions of acres have been withdrawn from cultivation and must be replanted if Soviet agriculture is to recover. Thus the new plan calls for sown areas to be increased in 1947 by 6.3 million hectares (in the collectives by 5.7 million hectares); and in 1948 by an additional 6.1 million hectares (of which 5 million are allocated to the collectives). This makes a total, for the next two years alone of 12.4 million hectares, or 30.6 million acres (the increased acreage projected for 1949 is passed over in silence by the architects of the new plan). Here, then, we have the minimum figures by which the cultivated area has declined since 1940. This huge acreage (equal in size to one-half of the cultivated land in all of Canada) amounts to 10 per cent of the total cultivated area in the Soviet Union. The actual figure of land withdrawn from production is unquestionably far higher. In any case, even the officially acknowledged decline reveals the grim situation, which is complicated still further by the terrible drouth of 1946, by the declining crop yields and the universal scarcities.
This dwindling of cultivated land expresses most strikingly the extent to which the technological foundation of Soviet agriculture, that is, its mechanized equipment, has deteriorated in wartime. The backbone of collective farming is the tractor. The shortage of draught animals renders tractor production all the more imperative. It is precisely here that the ravages of war have struck most deeply and lastingly. 137,000 tractors are listed among the official war-losses. The Fourth Five-Year Plan called for the production of “no less than 325,000 tractors” in 1945-1950. Such an output would have permitted the war losses to be covered in the space of two years, i.e., by the beginning of 1948.
 
The Deficit in Tractors
But production of tractors has fallen far below even the most pessimistic expectations. Resumption of tractor production has proceeded at a snail’s pace. Tractor production at the present time is half of what was originally envisaged, and less than one-third of the pre-war levels. This is obvious from the new plan targets. It now calls for the delivery of only 34,000 tractors in 1947, and hopes to double this figure by 1948 (the 1949 target is not even mentioned). At such a projected rate of production, the war losses cannot possibly be made until as late as 1949.
It inescapably follows that very few new tractors were delivered to agriculture last year. For if the target delivery for 1947 is 34,000 tractors, no more than a fraction of this number could have been made in 1946. Comrade Germain, in his brilliant analysis of Soviet economy in 1946, estimates that tractor production last year could not have gone much above 30,000. It is now an official Stalinist boast that this year “farms are to be supplied with from two to three times as many tractors and other agricultural machines and implements as last year” (USSR Information Bulletin, published by Soviet Embassy in USA, vol.VII, No.6, pages 9-10). This would fix the 1946 tractor output at from 11,000 to 17,000, a figure that is in all likelihood much closer to the actual one, than higher estimates.
In view of this situation, whether the 1947 output comes up to expectations or not, it is certain that the overwhelming bulk of the war-losses will not have been made good in time for sowing and harvesting of the 1947 spring crops. If 20,000 new tractors are supplied by June of this year, it would be far above the official anticipations. This cannot fail to affect the crop yields adversely. Should dry spells again ensue, under the famine conditions that already prevail, a catastrophe of unimaginable proportions would be precipitated.
Will it perhaps be possible to restore the war-losses by 1949? The Kremlin obviously is pinning all its hopes on precisely this perspective. It banks on squeezing by the year 1947 with 34,000 new tractors and then plans to cover the deficit with an additional 67,000 tractors in 1948. From the statistical standpoint, a solution seems to be within reach by 1949. But between these latest Stalinist statistics and the actual course of developments lie a great many unknowns. Let us single out only two of the most important factors.
In the first place, neither in 1947 nor in 1948 will agriculture have the necessary technological means for full-scale restoration. Just as the current tractor production cannot possibly be available except in part for spring sowing and harvesting, so, at best, only one-half of the projected 1949 tractor output will be available in the spring of 1949 (the remainder will roll off the production lines only in the fall and winter).
The question therefore actually poses itself as follows: Will it be possible, under these conditions, to achieve relative stability in agriculture during the next two critical years? As we have seen, this is by no means assured even from a purely technical standpoint. Adding greatly to this uncertainty are social and political factors that are undermining the entire collective farm system. It is evident, in any case, that the greatest obstacles to be surmounted in agriculture lie ahead and not behind.
Secondly, this minimum tractor output, for 1947 and 1948 alike, is not at all assured, even if all the resources are marshalled behind the effort, as the Kremlin will doubtless do. Tractor production is so low because labor productivity has sharply declined. It is virtually impossible to raise labor productivity under conditions where the workers are not guaranteed even their bare minimum of subsistence. But to remedy this situation it is first necessary to restore agriculture. The Kremlin has little immediate prospect for breaking out of this vicious circle.
Moreover, tractor production is so low because none of the major plants has as yet been fully re-equipped and reconverted to peacetime production. This grim news is implicit in the text of the February Plenum resolution which calls for the completion of all “construction work” in the Altai, Stalingrad, Kharkov, Vladimirsk and Lipetsky tractor plants only by the “first part of 1948.” This means that the reconstruction of the Stalingrad and Kharkov plants will not even be completed this year. The Altai and Vladimirsk plants are new ones that were supposed to have gone into operation last year; the Lipetsky plant, another new one, was scheduled for production this year. The old Chelyabinsk plant has only recently resumed the production of tractors. The other major Minsk plant is still under construction; it is to “be completed” by the first part of 1948; and to “be placed in operation” by the latter part of 1948. All this is hardly reassuring. It is quite easy – on paper – to double the output of plants which are either in process of construction or not even yet in operation. But achieving this in practice is an entirely different matter.
Translated into the language of economics, Stalin’s new “three-year” plan for agriculture means that ahead lie at least two more years of acutest crisis for the collective farm system as a whole, and, consequently, two years of crisis for Soviet economy as a whole, which cannot possibly be stabilized unless and until its agricultural sector is rehabilitated.
This unfolding crisis cannot fail to entail ever sharper political and social consequences. The instability of the Stalinist regime, which the economic impasse expresses so eloquently, will tend to aggravate the political and social consequences, which in their turn, will render the position of the ruling oligarchy more and more untenable. This is the only realistic perspective for Soviet development in the next period.

tein/J.G. Wright: Bureaucrats in Crisis (1955)




Wright Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index  |   ETOL Main Page

M. Stein and J.G. Wright
Bureaucrats in Crisis
Behind the Fall of Malenkov
(Spring 1955)

From Fourth International, Vol.16 No.2, Spring 1955, pp.44-48.

SOVIET developments are followed closely by the entire world, the international bourgeoisie especially. Fearful of the 1917 Revolution, of its vitality as expressed in the economic successes at home, and above all of its spread to other countries, they have kept vigilant watch on Soviet internal struggles ever since their 1917-23 failure to crush the first workers’ state through intervention and blockade. To this day Churchill, speaking for the most farsighted section of the imperialists, laments this failure.
They speculate on a personal struggle for power within the bureaucracy, their hopes aroused by the admitted Soviet economic difficulties, and by the shift in regimes from Malenkov-Beria-Molotov to Khrushchev-Bulganin-Zhukov in the 25 months since Stalin’s death. But they dread the real struggle of the Soviet masses against bureaucratic rule which finds a distorted reflection in the conflicts at the summits.
With the ruling caste they can reach agreements, and from time to time cohabit. But they can glean neither comfort nor profit from a regime of workers’ democracy. This would tumble the existing barriers between the Soviet masses and the Western working class, including that of the USA.; fuse the delayed workers’ revolution with the surge of the colonial people. The overthrow of Stalinism by the Soviet workers would signal the doom of US and world capitalism, just as the extension of the 1917 Revolution to the West would spell the end of Stalinism.
To follow Soviet events without an analysis of Soviet economic life, its history, its singular set of social relations and antagonisms is as false as it would be with regard to capitalist or colonial countries. For Marxists this is the ABC of political science.
The difficulties and convulsions of the post-Stalin days, just as the purges under Stalin, are rooted in the economic contradictions that have faced the USSR since the 1917 Revolution. They have become more complicated, have multiplied and compounded because of the false policies of the bureaucracy, because of the country’s heritage of backwardness, and the prolonged isolation of Soviet economy from the reserves of the world economy.
A brief review of the past will shed light on the present. The first workers’ state inherited a backward Czarst industry and agriculture, a backwardness that was the product of peculiar Russian development and beyond anyone’s power to have altered. In world economy, Czarist Russia played a subordinate role, that of a semi-colony of Western capitalism. Economically, she was closer to China than to the advanced countries of her times, such as Germany, the USA or Britain. Consequently the antithesis between the city and the village; and the antagonism between mental and manual labor were drawn to their extremes in the Czarist empire.
But the 1917 Revolution could not avail itself of the full resources of this economy, retarded as it was. It was left with an industry and agriculture ravaged by the First World War, by the years of Civil War, imperialist intervention and blockade, and the resulting famines and epidemics. Moreover, capitalist Russia had access to the reserves of world economy in the shape of financial “aid,” i.e., foreign loans and investments and the help of trade treaties, so decisive for the development of backward countries. Lenin and Trotsky’s government was cut off from the world market by the imperialists.
With the stabilization of the revolutionary government in 1923 attention was turned to economic tasks, the first of which was—to reconstruct. For the backward, war-ruined industry and agriculture had been geared to supply live million Red soldiers who defended the revolution.
The year 1923, when Soviet construction started, also marked the opening of the historic debate among the Soviet leadership. It first broke out over the issue of workers’ democracy and the struggle against the spread of bureaucratism through the party, state and administrative machines. This was an anticipation of the conflict that was later to develop over domestic economic policy, over the tasks of the revolution at home and abroad.
  
Stalinism vs. Trotskyism
Two warring tendencies crystallized in the course of this struggle. On the one side stood the proletarian tendency, headed by Leon Trotsky, the internationalist tendency. On the opposing side rallied the machine politicians and careerists, the nationalist tendency.
The internationalists stressed that there was no way out for Soviet economy and the workers’ state except on the world arena, except through the extension of the revolution. The platform of the nationalists was summed up in Stalin’s infamous theory of “socialism in one country.”
Stalin’s policy was based on building a self-sufficient industry within Soviet borders. The internationalists fought for an economic policy which stressed a balanced interrelation between the city and the village. More than a quarter century ago, Trotsky summarized it as follows:
“Between industry and agriculture, based on individual peasant households, there is a dialectic interaction. But industry, by far the more dynamic element, constitutes the motor force. In exchange for grain the peasant needs and wants manufactured goods. The democratic revolution, under the Bolshevik leadership, gave land to the peasants. The socialist revolution, under the same leadership, still supplies fewer goods and at higher prices than capitalism used, to offer in its day. This is exactly why a threat hangs over the socialist revolution as distinct from its democratic base. To the scarcity of manufactured goods, the peasant replies by a passive, slow-down strike in agriculture.
“He withholds his own grain from the market and refuses to plant more. The Right-Wingers propose to give more elbow-room to the capitalist tendencies in the village, to take less from the village, and to lower the tempo of industrial expansion.
“But, after all, this means that the volume of agricultural products would increase while the supply of manufactured goods would be further decreased. The disproportion between the two, which is at the bottom of the present economic crisis, would become more pronounced ...
“The platform of the [Trotskyist] Opposition excludes, first and foremost, the line of a shut-in, an isolated economy. It is senseless to try to disengage the Soviet economy from the world market by a wall of stone. Soviet economy’s fate will be decided by the over-all tempo of its development (including agriculture) and not at all by the degree to which it gains ‘independence’ from the world division of labor.” (Bulletin of the Russian Opposition, Nos.1-2, July 1929, page 22.)
Recent Soviet developments, the admitted economic crisis in particular, bring into sharp focus the original dispute. The Kremlin oligarchs are more aware of it than all of the capitalist publicists, Russian “specialists,” foreign correspondents, historians, biographers and assorted would-be sociologists. The post-Stalin era is marked by repeated references to the old conflict. Thus, Malenkov, when making his bid to don Stalin’s mantle, made pointed reference to the “Bukharinite Right Wing” and to the “Trotskyites.” When Malenkov was selected Scapegoat No.1 for the farm crisis and other troubles, his fall was accompanied by a barrage against the “Bukharinites,” against the “Trotskyites.”
Why do the echoes of the dispute of the Twenties reverberate in 1955? Because there is a close connection between the old, supposedly outlived struggle and living Soviet reality.
Stalin, leading the decisive cohorts of the bureaucracy, was allied in the Twenties with the Right Wing (Bukharin, Rykov, Tomsky) against the proletarian tendency. The line of this bloc was to “give more elbow-room to the capitalist elements in the village, to take less from the village, and lower the tempo of industrial expansion.” Their thesis was that “in this manner the kulak would ‘grow over peacefully into socialism’,” and, as a result, socialism would be built, even if “at a tortoise pace.” The concessions to the capitalist elements in agriculture not only failed to solve the farm crisis of the Twenties, but aggravated it. Each concession only whetted the restorationist appetite; meanwhile the industry was unable to provide any more manufactured goods to the well-to-do peasants who were profiteering.
The clash between the kulak and the state came to a head by the end of 1929, when the kulaks cut off supplies of grain to the cities, and seized control of the rural Soviets. In panic, Stalin broke with the Right Wing. From the policy of economic opportunism, he turned to adventurism. From the building of “socialism in one country” at a tortoise pace came the switch to a forced march to build socialism, by the end of the First Five-Year Plan. Yesterday’s slogan of “Kulak Grow Rich!” was replaced overnight by the call to “destroy the kulak as a class.” By naked force the peasants were driven into collectives, without any mechanized equipment. A protracted civil war gripped the countryside. Millions of peasants died while other multitudes were uprooted and deported to Siberia and Central Asia. To this day Soviet agriculture suffers from the slaughter of livestock during the “wholesale collectivization.” Many scarcities that the workers endured in the Thirties, and have to endure in 1955, can be traced to the same period.
  
The Problem Persists
Much has changed since then. Twenty-five million individual peasant holdings have given way to collectivized, mechanized agriculture of “94,000 amalgamated collectives” (Khrushchev). Soviet industry has become the second largest in the world, showing the power lodged in nationalized property and planning. The bureaucracy has extended its rule and privileges over the Eastern half of Europe. The Soviet Union has gained an ally in revolutionary China. But none of these changes have solved the domestic problem: the interrelation between industry and agriculture, between the city and the village.
The key to this problem remains the overcoming of the consumer goods famine, which has persisted from one Five-Year Plan to the next. The growth of Soviet industry bears the indelible imprint of Stalinist misrule and mismanagement. Industry has been expanded without regard to mass consumers; heavy industry disproportionately developed at the expense of agriculture and the light industrial sector. As a result Soviet economy just as that of the buffer countries suffers from acute scarcities in precisely those commodities of which there is a periodic glut in the advanced capitalist countries.
The solution eludes the bureaucracy because along the nationalist course there is no solution. The zigzags in economic policy—from economic opportunism to adventurism, and back again—underscore the blind alley in which the bureaucracy finds itself; and, concurrently, the paroxysms at the top express the growing mass pressure of workers and peasants, demanding the solution the bureaucracy cannot supply.
The liquidation of individual peasant holdings, by bureaucratic terror, has transformed Soviet agriculture, but has not supplied the population, increasing annually by three millions, and the cities, whose population has grown by 17 millions in recent years, with any more food per capita. After more than a quarter century of Stalinist “collectivization” Soviet agriculture is in a crisis whose “solution” has now been postponed officially to 1960!
The stormy growth of industry, at the cost of mass privations and under the bureaucratic lash, has supplied neither the villages nor the cities with more manufactured goods per capita. In fact, the scarcities of foodstuffs and of consumer goods have become more acute in 1955. The farm crisis is becoming converted in 1955 into a crisis of the current Five-Year Plan and of Soviet economy as a whole.
Stalin’s nationalist course, required, above all, that the status quo be maintained. To this end the bureaucracy sabotaged and betrayed the revolution in the West as in the East. It was confident that thereby it could curry favor with the world bourgeoisie and “neutralize” it. And indeed, the world bourgeoisie regarded the Stalinist policy, in economics as in politics, as the acme of realism. With true class instinct they feared and hated the program of the internationalists. As the struggle between the internationalists and the nationalists deepened in the USSR, the bourgeoisie saw its main enemy, as did the bureaucracy, in the Trotskyists.



KHRUSHCHEV



Stalin’s theory of “neutralizing” the world imperialists is a component part of his theory of “building socialism in one country.” They stand and fall together. The hoax that the Soviet Union and the capitalist environment could peacefully co-exist thus became substituted for the struggle for world socialism.
The bureaucracy, in return for diplomatic deals, prevented the extension of the revolution to the advanced countries which alone could have integrated Soviet industry with that of the developed countries, and in this way fully opened the reserves of world economy to the Soviet people. Meanwhile the growth of Soviet industry has not lessened Soviet dependence on the world market but has greatly increased it.
This dependence has been aggravated by the emergence of revolutionary China. The rise of this new world power, despite and against Stalin’s policy and “advice,” has imposed on the Kremlin an alliance with the most populous agricultural nation on our planet, which urgently needs capital goods, heavy equipment for industry, for transportation, mining and agriculture plus—equipment to modernize her armed forces. After decades of Stalinist efforts to compress Soviet productive forces within narrow national limits, the bureaucracy is suddenly confronted with the need to plan in accordance with its new inter-state obligations, in the first instance, to China! Such is history’s unexpected vengeance upon the architects of “socialism in one country”!
One of the chief products of the nationalist course has been the rise at home of a machine of coercion and parasitism, of vested power and privilege, which implants inequality and requires constant reinforcement, on a scale hitherto unknown. The multi-millioned caste devours and wastes a huge portion of the annual national income. Its methods of rule and of management dislocate the economy not only of the Soviet Union but of the East European countries. Its methods kill mass incentives and initiative, sow not only discontent and hatred but also cynicism and demoralization.
One of the pre-conditions for the bureaucracy’s rise—the scarcity of necessities and consumer goods—has turned into a permanent feature of its rule and continues to determine its despotic nature and methods. The dominant contradiction governing Soviet life, as that of East European countries, is the irrepressible conflict between this caste, its needs and interests, and the masses, their wants and aspirations.
With the economic successes the chasm has widened between the Stalinist rulers and the masses. Caste privileges have multiplied, as have the stratifications within the caste itself. The war and post-war years have seen the rise of a military caste, exceeding the Czarist or Prussian militarists in size, influence and privileges. Their specific weight in the ruling circles increased following the Beria purge, particularly with the latest shift in regimes and the elevation of Marshal Zhukov.
These same economic successes have spurred the growth, numerically and culturally, of the Soviet working class. Their spontaneous urge is to resume their rightful place on the political arena. This is irrefutably proved by the millions in forced labor camps, political prisoners in their overwhelming majority; by the rise of the Leninist Youth in the intellectual centers of the country (Moscow, Leningrad, Kiev, Odessa): the mass sympathy and support for the political prisoners who, under the leadership of the Young Leninists, organized the Vorkuta strike. [1]
The bureaucracy, universally hated, feels itself beleaguered. Over the decades its giant propaganda machine tried to deify Stalin. But who mourned when the despot died? And who grieved over Malenkov’s disgrace or cheered Khrushchev to power? Within their own ranks, conditions of perpetual martial law prevail. A semblance of freedom of thought and criticism is a luxury they cannot afford even to .their most pampered layer: the artists, writers and scientists.
Among the latter-day converts to Stalinist “realism” as against the “fatal admixture of illusion” in Trotsky’s internationalist line, was Isaac Deutscher, British journalist and biographer. He became overawed by the “successes” of the bureaucracy just at the moment it found itself in straits. He promised the “self-reform” of the bureaucracy at a time when mass revulsion against bureaucratic rule reached the point of explosions—the East German uprising, the ferment in the buffer countries, the Vorkuta general strike of forced laborers in the Arctic region. Amid a succession of purges, he prognosticated no more purges “along the old Stalinist models” and with “the old Stalinist routines.” The Deutscher school, which was riding high after Stalin’s death, fell on its face with “liberalizer” Malenkov’s downfall.

Events have repudiated “socialism in one country” as an Utopia in the service of the counter-revolution. The international struggle for socialism, on the contrary, has been confirmed as the living reality.
The dominant fact of the international situation today, as it has been since the outbreak of the First World War in 1914, is the death agony of capitalism. The year 1914 gave the signal that capitalist rule was obsolete because private ownership of the means of production had turned into an absolute brake upon a development of productive forces adequate to meet global mass needs and wants.
  
The Betrayals
The 1917 Revolution came as the first successful attempt of the world working class, on the soil of Russia, to rationalize the world productive forces on the only foundation possible, that of collective productive relations and institutions. It opened the first stage of the world revolution. By 1919 the German, Italian and other European workers, spurred by the victory of the Russian workers and peasants, made their bid for socialist power. They were beaten back because they were betrayed by parties that called themselves socialist but sided with the counter-revolution. The Social Democracy saved bourgeois rule in Europe after World War I.
The way was thus opened for the emergence of fascism in the West. But even this unleashing of reaction caused the first wave of the world revolution to recede only temporarily. There was no lack thereafter of revolutionary situations either in Europe or in the East (Hungary, the Balkans, Germany in 1923 and again in 1931-33, China in 1925-27, the Spanish Revolution 1931-36, the revolutionary situation in France 1937-38, and finally the Civil War in Spain 1936-39).
But by the end of 1923, a new counter-revolutionary force began to enter the world arena—the Stalinist bureaucracy. It exploited the temporary reflux of the revolution to expropriate the workers politically at home, and then to become itself the main force inside the world labor movement for the temporary stabilization of capitalism. Like the Social Democracy, it saved bourgeois rule in Europe and the colonies, and paved the way for World War II.
European capitalism, rotted to the core, with the mass of the people turned against capitalism, as post-war elections were to show repeatedly, survived only because of Stalinism. In return for a power deal (Yalta and Potsdam) which gave the Kremlin Eastern Europe as its sphere of influence, Stalinism guaranteed the resuscitation of capitalism in Western Europe. Upon orders from the Kremlin, the armed workers of France and Italy, the only armed forces of any consequence in these countries at the time, were disarmed and disbanded. The Greek revolution was betrayed. Stalin sought to crush the Yugoslav revolution. This by no means exhausts the list, but it suffices to illustrate how the crimes of the Social Democracy following World War I were repeated and compounded by Stalinism following World War II.
Stalinism saved capitalist rule in decayed Europe. It could not save imperialist rule over all of the colonies. Not that they did not try. In India and Ceylon the Stalinist parties sided with the British colonial despots; they helped bring back the French occupation troops to Indo-China; and in China Stalin “advised,” as late as 1948, that Mao continue to cohabit with Chiang Kai-shek. The colonial revolution nonetheless erupted over the heads of the imperialists and of the Kremlin. It could not be contained on the one hand because of the explosive nature of the agrarian problem, and on the either, the refusal of colonial people to submit any longer to the foreign oppressors.
The reward for these and other betrayals has come in the shape of the “cold war,” the arms race, the nuclear weapons race and the war threat to the USSR and to all of mankind. Such is the price paid for Stalinist “realism” by the Soviet and world working class.



BULGANIN



After more than four decades of capitalist death agony, and over three decades of Stalinist rule, mankind in the meantime has arrived at the nuclear age. The destructiveness of the new weapons points up the urgency of the socialist solution; and, at the same time, illuminates the meaning, necessity and power of liberating ideas.
The world bourgeoisie, with the US monopolists in the van, are ideological bankrupts. Barren of ideas as against socialism since 1914, they have had in their arsenal only the weapons first of the Social Democracy and then of Stalinist despotism. Today their main weapon, apart from naked force, is to smear the liberating socialist struggle by identifying it with Stalinism, promoting the myth of the omnipotence of the bureaucracy, and misrepresenting the choice before mankind as that between their rule and that of Stalinism.
Humanity’s problems can be solved only as a world whole, to which all of the national or regional parts are subordinate. In 1923 the platform of the internationalists was based on the world socialist revolution as the sole way out for the USSR. This applies with even greater force in 1955. The only theory that has withstood the test of events is Trotsky’s theory of the permanent revolution.
  
Trotsky’s Theory
This theory embraces three basic propositions unified in a single line of thought.
The most fundamental proposition from which the other two derive, deals with the world character of the socialist revolution. This results from the condition of modern economic life and mankind’s social structure.
“Internationalism is no abstract principle, it truly mirrors, in theory and in politics, the global nature of present-day economy, the international development of the productive forces, the international sweep of the class struggle. The socialist revolution begins on national soil. But it cannot be completed there. The preservation of the socialist revolution within a national framework can lead only to a provisional regime, even though one, as Soviet experience shows, of long duration ... Its way out lies exclusively in the victory of the working class of the advanced countries. From our standpoint a national revolution is not a self-sufficient whole; it is simply a single link of the international chain. The world revolution is a permanent process, notwithstanding temporary ups and downs” (Trotsky).
The second basic proposition deals with the transition into socialism of colonial and semi-colonial, and generally backward countries whose democratic revolutions have been historically delayed. They cannot belatedly solve their democratic tasks, in the first instance their agrarian problem, in any other way except through the methods of the proletarian revolution, except by transgressing the framework of capitalist relations. The dynamics of a belated bourgeois revolution, Trotsky said, inexorably leads to the proletarian dictatorship. Historically this is determined by the correlation of class forces in such countries.
Finally, Trotsky characterizes the Socialist revolution as such:
“For an indefinitely extended interval, and through constant internal conflict all social relations are overhauled. Society uninterruptedly undergoes a moulting process. One stage of transformation flows directly from the one before. This process retains, of necessity, a political character, that is, unwinds through collisions among various groups of the society that is being overhauled. Explosions of civil war and foreign wars alternate with periods of ‘peaceful’ reform. Revolutions in economic life, in technology, the sciences, the family, everyday life, and in morality unwind in complex interaction, without allowing society to reach an equilibrium. Herein lies the permanent character of the socialist revolution as such.”
The only theory that truly expresses the reality of our times, and points the way out of the crisis of mankind, is the theory of the permanent revolution.
 
Footnote
1. See the series of articles by Brigitte Gerland in the Militant, Jan. 17 to March 7, 1955.




The February price break in the commodity markets signalled, in cur opinion, the incipient crisis of American agriculture. It is still far too early to gauge the rate at which this crisis will unfold. But the prospect for the next few months is that, barring crop failures, agriculture will be compelled to absorb sharp cuts in its price structure.
Can such an “adjustment” in agricultural prices take place without affecting the existing price structure as a whole?
The present precarious balance of American industry is much more dependent upon agriculture than was ever the case in the past. Thus during the boom of the Twenties the equilibrium between industry and agriculture – worked out over a long number of years – rested on a ratio of 1 to 16. In other words, out of every 16 dollars of national income, the farmer received one dollar. The agricultural boom of recent years has sharply increased the farmer’s share of the national income. According to Federal Reserve Board figures, he received in 1946 one dollar out of every ten. And last year, even more.
 
A New Balance
Industry has been operating on the basis of this new proportion, and any sudden shift immediately poses the problem of establishing a new balance. This cannot be done painlessly or in a brief space of time. Because farmers now dispose of a bigger share of the national income, every blow to farm income becomes more quickly translated into blows to other sectors of the home market, in the first instance, retail trade.
To illustrate. Gross farm income last year is estimated at 30 billion dollars. A reduction of 10% in crop prices would lop off at once several hundred million dollars. A 20% slash would amount to more than the first year’s projected “European Aid” program. Slashes of one-third and more would approximate last year’s total foreign trade.
Thus, sizable declines in farm income imply not only profound repercussions in other sectors but drastic readjustments for industry and for the domestic market as a whole.
Weeks before the commodity price break, soft spots began to show up in retail trade reports. This “spottiness” has recently become more marked, especially in rural areas.
 
Phony Arguments
The argument that retail trade should profit from lower farm prices is obviously phony. Retail food prices, which have scarcely dropped at all, will tend to lag far behind any present or future declines in the commodity markets. As for the prices of manufactured goods, they never fall as fast or as much as do farm prices.
The argument that farmers will be “well off” anyway, even with much lower prices for their, crops also has little bearing here. Traditionally a free spender when his income is on the upgrade, the farmer is no less habituated to “do without” when the specter of lean days stares him in the face.
That is why bankers and industrialists are now keeping one eye cocked on weather reports while the other eye is glued on retail trade reports, especially from rural areas.
In the face of declining retail trade such an argument as the heavy backlog of orders in heavy industry is of little weight. During all booms, especially inflationary booms, imposing backlogs accumulate. But they tend to dissipate rather suddenly, as happened in 1920.
Perhaps the situation might not be so precarious if agriculture alone was involved. The whole trouble is that industry, despite its outward signs of strength, has been fed too long by inflationary fires. This appears most strikingly if we view the economy from the standpoint of the physical volume of production during the last two years. Last year was supposed to be a peak year. But the truth is that over-all production last year was not much bigger than in the previous year, 1946.
Where we do find a whopping increase is in the dollar figures, in particular profits. This is admitted by such conservative bankers as the Guarantee Trust Company, who say in their Jan. 28 monthly letter:
“The year as a whole, however, witnessed no great increase in the physical volume of output. The rather striking gains that were reported in gross national products, income, expenditures and other dollar indices were due for the most part to the advances in prices.”
In other words, virtually the same amount of goods which the country absorbed in 1946 on the basis of a gross national output of 204 billion dollars was dumped on the home market last year with a mark up to 235 billion dollars. The people were forced to buy the same goods as in 1946 while paying out 31 billion dollars more. This orgy of inflation placed an unbearable strain on the purchasing power of the masses.
 
Large Surplus
The resulting grave discrepancy between mass consumption and the inflated “gross national output” has been, of course, carried over into this year. The home market must absorb in 1948 at least as much as it did in 1947, if the economy is to continue operating at the same levels as before.
But the greater the reduction in farm income, all the lower will be the farmers’ purchasing power? This will leave large quantities of unsold goods overhanging the market.
As for the workers, their wages have lagged so far behind steeply rising prices that they are no longer able to buy what they did last year.
But the workers and farmers constitute the overwhelming majority of the population. If they are unable to buy, where then is an outlet to be found in a peacetime economy for the huge surplus of high priced goods?
Storing more and more unsold goods in warehouses, as was done last year, is obviously risky because inventories already amount to more than 42 billion dollars.
The sole visible outlet is foreign trade, which has been steadily declining since its peak last May.
 
Must Safeguard Profits
There is a practical solution. It is: to raise the living standards of both the workers and the farmers. There then would be no limits to how much industry and agriculture can produce, or how much the home market can absorb, but this solution is excluded for a capitalist government, whose primary concern is to safeguard the profits of the monopolies.
Whatever immediate measures Washington applies – and from all indications the biggest hopes right now are being pinned on the 5 billion dollar program projected under the Marshall Plan – they are powerless to long sustain an agriculture whose production has risen one and a half times since pre-war and an industry whose productive capacity is twice as big as it ever was.
The Marshall Plan and similar measures can serve to temporarily cushion the shocks to the country’s economy. They cannot avert the downward plunge first of the retail trade and next of industry, which is approaching ever closer.
 




Feb. 10 – In their year-end forecasts for 1948 the most conservative of capitalist experts and government economists saw no trouble whatever ahead for at least six months. The ink has hardly dried on these optimistic predictions when we find the prices of one agricultural product after another undergoing grave convulsions, with a huge question mark placed over the fate of American agriculture as a whole.
Never before in the 100-year existence of the Chicago wheat pit did prices of wheat and corn break so violently as they did for four days beginning with Wednesday, Feb. 4.
This was not limited to foodstuffs alone. Raw materials like industrial and inedible oils followed suit. These registered by the second day “a decline unprecedented since the days immediately following World War I,” according to the Journal of Commerce, authoritative Wall Street daily.
No less crucial is the extent of this price break. Involved were not only foods (wheat, corn, oats, flour, cocoa, lard, etc. ) but a long list of raw materials (cotton, hides, rubber, cotton oil, tallow, grease etc.).
Many government and business spokesmen have dismissed all this as a temporary and even a “wholesome and healthy” adjustment. Just the opposite is true. It denotes instead the eruption to the surface of monstrous dislocations of inflated capitalist economy. These dislocations are now breaking through its weakest sector, the agricultural price structure.
Not superficial causes but profound and lasting changes in agricultural conditions, at home and abroad, underlie the current price break. In brief, this changed condition is as follows: Last year began as a year of famine crops in Europe. Australia raised little more than was needed for home consumption. Canada’s crop was poor and at home there was a “corn shortage.” Apart from Argentina, the 1947 world market was thus dependent on the Chicago wheat and corn traders.
What they did is now history.
They forced food prices so high as to severely restrict consumption even at home.
Vast Surplus
But this year begins in an entirely different setting. The highly inflated domestic agricultural price structure is subjected to the additional strains of an unexpectedly large carryover of almost 800 million bushels of wheat. This is enough to increase government shipments abroad, maintain record home consumption and still retain 150 million bushels by June.
Meanwhile Australia and Argentina, both with bumper crops, are today in a position between them to export from 3 to 4 million tons of grain and still retain ample reserves. Prospects for Europe, whose grain harvests come early (June), are quite favorable, just as is the case in both Canada and here, where harvests come a month later. At the same time Russia has reentered the world grain market with sizable deliveries.
The Chicago traders and speculators are thus faced with the prospect of no longer being principal world suppliers as in 1947. Instead of serving as a basis for unbridled speculation, the huge stocks at home now overhang the market, threatening to turn from assets into liabilities within the next months when new crops will make additional millions of bushels available for export.
Only natural catastrophes at home or in Europe can alter this situation decisively. While time is running shorter and shorter, the odds are in favor of good crops.
The unfolding situation thus parallels that of 1920 when with the revival of the world market, agricultural prices collapsed, causing widespread hardship among farmers everywhere while millions continued to go underfed or hungry because they were too poor to buy even at reduced rates.
 
World Condition Decisive
Thus, barring a series of natural calamities, what is decisive is precisely this greatly improved world agricultural condition. The situation is not altered by whether or not the commodity markets are sustained temporarily at this or that level, or whether commodity prices are allowed, amid wild fluctuations, to drop to government supported parity levels.
The only question still in doubt is how much and how quickly the farmers and the country as a whole will be made to pay for these unavoidable price “adjustments” in agriculture. The decision here rests for the time being in the hands of Big Business and its government in Washington.
It goes without saying that Washington will intervene vigorously in the commodity markets, just as it has been doing all the while by its behind-the-scenes operations.
In the unpredictable day-to-day and week-to-week developments ahead this government intervention will, of course, play a major role. We have not long to wait before the staunchest opponents of government “interference” and “controls” will begin clamoring the loudest for them.
 
Temporary Control
But powerful as it is, government intervention is not omnipotent. It is one thing to prop up temporarily this or that commodity, it is something else to long sustain all the foodstuffs and agricultural raw materials at artificially inflated levels.
Even if the American capitalists were willing to spend billions – as they are not – to protect agriculture at home from the impact of the world market, they could succeed only in temporarily modifying world market trends, but never in reversing them. Prices of foods and other agricultural products are determined on the world market and not in Chicago or Washington.
The current price convulsions therefore spell out an ominous message to the American farmers. It reads: “Your days of prosperity are numbered; the good old ‘normal’ days of depressed prices for crops and high prices for manufactured goods are before you.”
This far from exhausts the meaning of the commodity price-breaks. Does it signify, as in the past, sharp declines in other markets, in particular a slump in retail trade? And is it also the first installment of the depression for economy as a whole? Or can price “adjustments” be confined primarily to agriculture while industry, nevertheless, keeps going at high levels for a prolonged period of time?
On these questions, government and business opinion is now sharply divided amid an atmosphere of tension, anxiety and even panic. Next week we shall answer these questions and give our reasons why the unfolding crisis of American agriculture must at the next stage bring in its wake the crisis of other sectors of the economy, in the first instance a slump in retail trade, and with that, the crisis of the economy as a whole.
 




In November, production set a new peacetime record. But it was not reported at the time that the bulk, if not all, or this increased output went into the warehouses of wholesalers, manufacturers and retailers. Figures just released by the Department or Commerce disclose this beyond the shadow of a doubt. Overall inventories have soared to the astronomical sum of more than 42 billion dollars, with over a billion being added in November, the largest monthly increase in history,
At the end of last July at the bottom of the 1947 production downswing, total inventories stood at 38½ billion. In the next four months production was pulled back in large part through the expedient of pumping 3½ billion dollars worth of goods into warehouses.
Here we have one of the secrets of the continuing boom. Production has been kept going not merely to satisfy the demand of the domestic and foreign markets but because of a frenzied gamble that prices will continue to rise. Industry is thus inextricably attached to a price balloon, whose inflation has thus far kept the economy from going into a tailspin.
The dilemma confronting the American capitalists is: Either the prices must be kept shooting up. or production must be cut back in one field after another. When confronted with this dilemma last July, the decisive section of the capitalists, with the steel and coal magnates in the van, chose inflation as the way out. They temporarily averted production cutbacks and the resulting depression by resorting to a general price rise and the ensuing orgy of speculation.
Now they have to decide again whether or not to impart more impetus to the inflationary spiral. They can do so by still another price hike in steel and by still further expanding credit in order to carry even bigger inventories.
They did this last July and they can do it again. But the conditions for this operation are not as favorable as they were six months ago. For one thing, the credit situation is much tighter because the banks and the insurance companies have already extended unprecedented loans.
 
Becoming Alarmed
Not that additional funds are unavailable. On the contrary, the banks still dispose of scores of billions of credit. But an important section of the bankers is becoming alarmed by the speculative orgy, and the ultimate consequences not so much to the economy as a whole –  as to themselves. The more the banks finance bigger inventories, all the greater is their loss risk.
For instance, a general price slash of 10%  – advocated not so long ago by Truman himself  –  would today mean an immediate loss of not less than 4.2 billion dollars on current inventories alone. Unless the bankers watch their step they may be holding the bag.
Moreover, tighter credit, with higher interest rates, means greater profits to the financiers. But they are hesitant to move drastically, because they are already quite heavily committed. Only formal steps have thus far been taken to clamp down on credit. Meanwhile the debate over this issue mounts, and the shadow of a credit squeeze is superimposing itself on the threat already represented by the imbalance in inventories.
Even more serious are the unchecked downward trends in the foreign and domestic markets. In November foreign trade resumed its downslide, skidding 8% from October. This coupled with other whopping export slashes since May make very slim the prospect of retaining in 1948 the export levels of 1947, even with the most effective operation of the Marshall Plan.
 
Less for More
At home, the retailers are still by and large recording on their cash registers higher sales, while disposing of fewer items. But selling less for more money has always been good business from the capitalist standpoint.
The picture of the titles of manufacturers and wholesalers is not quite so bright. Their combined sales in November took a tumble to the tune of almost 3 billion dollars, with the manufacturers’ sales sliding off 1.3 billion and the wholesalers skidding even more from the October totals.
This drop has been dismissed by government experts as harmless on the grounds that there were “fewer working days” in November than in October. But this can explain only a part of the thumping drop. There is a much more direct connection between production and the number of working days in a month than there is between the latter and sales. Yet production did not drop off like sales in November. On the contrary it rose.
 
Growing Abyss
The November sales drop therefore reflects at least in part the growing abyss between the volume of production and the absorbing capacity of the domestic market. The pinch is being felt by such giants as General Electric with its annual sales volume of one. billion. GE’s latest sales report records a substantial drop. This has much more to do with the minor price reduction recently announced than the ballyhoo about “fighting inflation.”
At all events, the entire capitalist world, the bankers and credit men in particular, are now keeping their eyes glued to the retail sales reports. So far as they are concerned, these sales now spell everything. Up to now retail sales have kept hovering slightly above 1947 levels. If they stay there, a breathing spell, they believe, is assured for at least six months. Should they slide off, then the depression they have postponed but not averted will make its appearance.
What is even more decisive today are the sales of manufacturers and wholesalers, who hold the overwhelming bulk of the swollen inventories and who have increased them proportionately much more than the retailers. Should these sales continue to dip, then the “10% gains” recorded by the retailers will prove to be so much chaff in the wind.
 




Optimism is running quite high in business circles these days – at least so far as the first six months of 1948 are concerned. Industrial analysts, government experts and economic staffs of all leading Wall Street periodicals agreed that the inflationary boom will continue in the period immediately ahead and even spurt to new heights.
They confidently predict new productive peaks, with retail trade expanding beyond the huge dollar volumes recorded in 1947. Employment is expected to continue at current levels, with slight boosts in wages and still steeper hikes in prices. What will happen after mid-year [word missing], these authorities refuse to say.
Typical of the current outlook is the analysis given by the weekly [word missing] United States News, Jan. 2, which lists the following factors as operating strongly to sustain the boom:

A third round of wage increases: “a general boost in factory earnings of 10 to 15 cents an hour is probable.”
 
These presumptive higher wages together with increasing “personal income payments” (profits) are expected to keep the domestic market at approximately the 1947 levels.
 
Since the retail trade did not [word missing] in dollar volume last year, continues U.S. News, it therefore follows that the consumer demand, propped up by higher wages, should continue – for six more months, in in this case. But this does not follow at all. The inflationary splurge of 1947 has drastically affected the domestic market, and may have well undermined it beyond repair. Physical volume of retail trade has definitely dropped below 1946. At all [word missing], it still remains to be seen if the domestic market will be able to absorb the same share of the total national output as it did in 1947.
 

No Guarantee

The boom must continue because food prices and agricultural prices in general will remain high, a lot higher. It goes without saying that a collapse of the commodities market would drag down the whole economy with it. And in and of itself, the maintenance of the agricultural price structure is no guarantee of capitalist prosperity. Industrial production has broken down in periods of high as well as low food prices.
 
The final major sustaining factor according to U.S. News, is the expectation that the construction industry will continue at current levels. The admitted lag in industrial building, it is expected, will be taken up by residential building and federal and state public construction.
 

Purely Inflationary
It will be observed that all of these boom-sustaining factors are purely inflationary in character. Gone beyond recall from these capitalist prognostications are such basic factors as the pent-up consumer demand for durable and non-durable goods resulting from war-created scarcities, the huge backlog of savings, the need for new capital investments, and so on. This only underscores the fact that the current boom is fed primarily by speculation, and constantly rising prices and profits. At best, this is only a short-term perspective.
After citing the above-listed “points of support” the U.S. News gingerly takes up the “weaknesses” in the capitalist structure.
First and foremost there is the critical condition of the capitalist world market. “Exports are not likely to be any larger in 1948 than in 1947, if as large.” It was the unprecedented foreign trade that temporarily relieved the strain on the sagging domestic market m the second quarter of last year. But this outlet has now admittedly been saturated, The plan is to sustain it artificially by pumping billions of dollars into bankrupt European capitalism under the Marshall Plan. Under the most favorable conditions, this, too, is a temporary expedient capable of siphoning off only a small fraction of the vast national output.
The second and no less ominous development is the huge accumulation of inventories, now pressing the 42 billion dollar mark. “Supply pipe lines” of manufacturers, wholesalers and retailers “generally are filled,” admits the U.S. News. Yet inventory accumulation has been continuing at a rate of close to a billion dollars a month. With higher production, this rate must be stepped up. So long as prices shoot up, these huge inventories remain “profitable.” But with any serious break in the price structure, they threaten to back up on production.
Thirdly, the capital goods sector – “business investment in plant and equipment” – has also been saturated. If instead of a “levelling off” process a sharp decline is registered in this field, then a depression cannot be averted.
Among the shakiest segments of capitalist economy is its credit structure. Commercial and agricultural loans are more than double pre-war levels, pressing the 15 billion dollar mark. This figure does not include real estate loans and consumer credit. In effect the boom has been kept going by the manipulation of the credit system whereby private debt, has been increased by almost 40 billion dollars since 1941. A sudden clamping down of credit would topple both the inventory accumulation and the price structure. Continued credit expansion, on the other hand, is the primary condition for sustaining the inflationary boom, but it only postpones the day of settlement, and nothing more.
In the estimation of capitalist experts the above listed “weaknesses” are fully offset by the “sustaining” factors. Their guess is – and it is only a guess – that nothing will happen to upset the economic apple-cart for another six months.
 




MARCH 2 – Increasing nervousness and tension characterize the economic situation as the domestic market heads for its major test in the next four weeks (the Easter sale season).
The closing weeks in February established no clear trend in retail trade, with the sales for the month as a whole recording a “6% increase” over last year. The commodity market fluctuated at levels near or below those of last year, with little indication that the existing agricultural price structure can be stabilized. The stock market continued to scrape bottom after suffering an estimated loss of some 3 billion dollars in February. But this decline has not penetrated the low marks of the last two years and the major test of the stock market is likewise still to come.
While the economy is passing through this transitional phase, the debate over what lies ahead grows more and more heated in capitalist circles. Among the super-optimists is Sumner H. Schlichter. a Harvard economist, who in his survey (N.Y. Times, Feb. 29) concludes that all the existing elements of weakness are far outweighed by the elements of strength, leaving the economy very strong – “stronger than most Americans and foreigners realize.”
 
Typical Survey
This professional survey is typical of the capitalist school of economic thought and is well worth analyzing. Schlichter begins his catalogue of economic strength by pointing to agriculture. This feat of converting a major current source of weakness into a factor of vitality is accomplished by a twofold operation.
On the one hand the Professor coolly states that the sharp break of agricultural prices has “greatly strengthened the economy.” And on the other, he points to the hoped-for “shortages” in meats and dairy products, which will presumably safeguard agricultural prices from a “general weakness.”
As the second sign of strength Schlichter singles out the “money supply.” Ironically enough he points to high “hourly earnings” as a safeguard against depression. He omits to mention 1. that prices have far outstripped wages; 2. that an increasing share of the “money supply” has been siphoned off as profits into the coffers of the monopolists; and 3. that the purchasing power of the mass of the people has been dwindling while industry has kept piling up more and more goods into warehouses.
 
Debt Expansion
Third on the professor’s list is the mounting private debt, which has soared to record heights, amounting to more than 170 billion dollars. Schlichter hopes that if people can continue to go into debt, business can keep booming. He bases this hope of further debt expansion on the fact that in 1940 the private debt was much bigger than the annual national income, whereas today “it is over 10% smaller.”
But in 1940 the national income was below 100 billion dollars and the country was just entering its war boom. Today the national income must be sustained at a level of 200 billion dollars, in order to keep industry running, not to mention the need of maintaining the huge public debt and the record “peacetime” federal budget. Under these conditions, further increases in private debt add to the strains on the economy and tend to drag it down, and not to reinforce it.
Schlichter’s next four points are all devoted to “backlogs” and unsatisfied needs. There is still a great need of housing, a shortage of automobiles, etc. The industrial plant is still in need of expansion and re-equipment. States and cities need “streets, roads, schools, hospitals and other public works,” etc., etc.
 
Takes for Granted
To be sure, these needs exist, as they always have under capitalism. But they count for exactly nothing when the capitalists find it no longer profitable to maintain production.
Schlichter’s final point is that the “capacity of consumers to expand their demand for goods is still large.” In other words, he takes it for granted that the domestic market has not been impaired by the inflationary orgy and remains as strong today as it was last year and the year before. But this is precisely what has to be proved.
Obviously, the professor is just whistling in the dark to keep his spirits up. This is shown clearly by his own remarks in which he summarizes his optimistic balance sheet: Here they are:
“The many strong features in the economic situation do not assure that the country will not escape an early recession, but they make an early recession unlikely and indicate that, if one occurs, it will be mild.”
Just the contrary is true. It is precisely the “many strong features” cited by Schlichter that bring the depression closer and render quite unlikely its being “mild” in character.
 




It was clear from the outset that the Czech events were intimately connected with the intensified “cold war” between
Washington and Moscow. Now new evidence has been made public which throws additional and alarming light on the progress of the “cold war” and its connection with what is transpiring in Czechoslovakia.
There have been rumors for some time that the Kremlin had made a direct bid to Washington for another deal and that these “peace feelers”, had been flatly rejected. This is. now authenticated by such authoritative business periodicals as the weekly United States News and Business Week.
According to the March 5 U.S. News, Stalin’s offer to meet with Truman was made “late in January.” Despite official denials of any such offer, this article goes on to say flatly: “The fact is that the proposal was brought to Washington and turned down.”
The March 6 Business Week corroborates this by an equally categoric assertion that “official Washington – and that means the State Department and the military – has brushed aside Russia’s January peace feelers.”
Stalin’s Czech coup is thus directly linked to this rejection by Washington of his overtures.
What this sensational evidence highlights is the determination by Wall Street to force matters to a showdown. The U.S. News goes so far as to say that the official policy goes beyond any plans merely to hurl back the Kremlin to its original borders, but actually involves the destruction of the regime itself. “U.S. now is committed to a policy of attempting to upset the existing Russian regime by means short of shooting war.”
There is little reason to dismiss this as journalistic phrase-mongering. Thus far there has been no sign of willingness on Washington’s part to give an inch. In pursuit of their line the Wall Street war-makers have been dragging this country into one adventure after another, as witness their determination to step up military intervention in Greece.
The fact that previous moves have brought little results (as in Greece and China) has only tended to increase loose talk of “action” not only by means of dollar “aid” but through military “assistance” of one type or another.
What such talk and such moods imply hardly needs any comment, This situation, obviously, cannot be prolonged indefinitely. There are only two possibilities in the situation: war or – another deal.
 
Temporary Deal
A temporary deal with the Kremlin, despite Washington’s openly aggressive policy, is certainly not excluded. The Kremlin is anxious for such a deal, as attested by its January proposals. On the other hand, Wall Street’s war plans do not exclude the possibility of a new deal with the Kremlin. A temporary “armistice” would fit into Wall Street’s plans of aggression, as Hitler’s pact with Stalin in 1939 fitted into the Nazis plans.
The effects of such a deal would make themselves felt most immediately on the domestic political scene. The Stalinists would execute still another one of their countless flip-flops. They would drop their current mask of opposition to “American imperialism.” They would drop Wallace like a hot potato. They would start beating the drums once again for the preservation of “unity” among all “progressive forces,” and throw their support without reservations behind any deal that Stalin may be able to reach with the U.S. State Department.
In connection with these new revelations, it is interesting to recall Churchill’s recent speech where he proposed that a final meeting be held with Stalin at which time Anglo-American imperialism would deliver an ultimatum: “Either accept our terms along these and these lines, or we will use the atom bomb to destroy you.”
 




Feb. 24 – Since the commodity price break, two new developments have taken place in the country’s economy. They can prove decisive in determining what lies immediately ahead. On the one hand, we have the first significant signs of dislocation in the home market; and, on the other, there is the action of the Steel Trust boosting sharply prices of semifinished steel.
These two trends run counter to one another and in the process of their unfolding are bound to lead to highly antagonistic consequences, thus adding still another contradiction to an already explosive economic situation.
The first week of the commodity price, break gave no definite signs of disturbance in the domestic market as reflected in the highly sensitive field of department store sales. For the week ending Feb. 7 the Federal Reserve Board weekly reports showed signs of “softness” appearing here and there.
But on a national scale, department store sales continued to record the same gains in dollar volume as in the last several months. In the Feb 7 week, there was a 9% increase as against last year’s sales. But the reports for the following week (ending Feb. 14). show a decrease of 3% as against last year. This drop is quite small.
Nevertheless, it represents a marked shift, which if it persists, will reverse the trend of the entire previous period. Up to now the stores have been taking in an average of 10% more in dollars than they did last year. A shift from 10% ever last year’s sales to 3% under last year”s figures therefore represents a loss in sales of hundreds of millions of dollars a month.
Furthermore, the most ominous feature of this initial decline is its widespread character. The only district reporting any gain was the New York area with its 1% larger sales. The rest of the country showed losses ranging from 9% in the Boston reserve district (covering New England) to 2% decline in the San Francisco district (covering the West Coast).
 
Easter Season
In the second place, this relatively sharp drop comes at the beginning of the Easter sale season which as a rule steps up retail trade. It is, of course, too early to say whether or not the long-indicated breaking point in retail trade is already here. A single week is not enough to establish a trend. But the next period up to Easter week itself (ending March 27) is indeed highly symptomatic and may very well tell the full story.
In any case, in our opinion, one controversial aspect of the current situation is already quite clear. The commodity price break has such power behind it that under the existing conditions it is extremely difficult, if not impossible, to confine its repercussions to agricultural products alone. It does, as we have maintained, tend to communicate itself to other markets.
The scope and sharpness of the initial decline in department store sales within two weeks’ time is proof of how rapidly and profoundly it is already affecting the vulnerable sector of retail trade.
A continuation of this trend (only potential as yet) would mean a collision between industry and its record volume of output, on the one side, and the limits set by the shrinking domestic market itself, on the other. This has long been a potential danger. In the next stage it is bound to become the reality. Such a head-on collision can prove catastrophic for economy as a whole.
It can be averted and even postponed primarily on one condition – provided the dollar volume of retail sales can either be maintained at former levels or raised above them.
The decline in physical volume of retail sales which set in during the middle of last year did not prove decisive at the time because the economy was jet-propelled to new price levels by the inflationary splurge. It was the Steel Trust at that time that fixed the economic pattern of the second half of 1947 by hiking iron and steel prices on top of a thumping increase in coal prices.
As we pointed out at the time, this measure could not fail to produce a general price increase, since the price of these basic commodities – iron and coal – determines the price structure as a whole. The speculative orgy to which this led in all fields (with the exception of the Stock Exchange) is now history. Thereby the collision between industry and the domestic market has been averted for some seven months.
 
Price Rise in Steel
The current price hike in steel is intended to serve the same purpose. It is not a minor measure of inflation, even though it appears to be thus far, restricted to only a single sector of steel products, the semifinished branch, which roughly accounts for one-fourth of the total steel output. The actual boostamounts to more than $7 a ton as against the reported figure of $4 to $5. It directly affects other steel products.
For example, Allegheny Ludlum has added $10 a ton on cold-rolled carbon strip while jacking up the price of silicon sheets by $15 to $25 per ton.
By the time such whopping increases reach the consumer they snowball to roughly 20% and more on the price of durable goods from autos and refrigerators to pets and pans. This is, therefore, a major inflationary measure. It is similar, if not identical, to what was done last July. It is intended to produce the same results.
The prospect of still higher prices makes it profitable to maintain and even add to existing inventories, no matter how large. The fuel that this adds to speculation – buying and hoarding in expectation of still higher prices – hardly requires comment in the light of the still fresh experience.
The whole question therefore is: Will this fanning of inflationary fires prove successful the second time as it did the first? A partial success is by no means excluded. But this in turn depends on several factors, of which the most important is once again the existing, condition of the domestic market, Can the latter today absorb a. general price rise as was the case in the second part of last year? Or has the inflationary orgy already sapped beyond repair the domestic market?
 
More Explosive
The final outcome of this desperate inflationary measure will be only to render more explosive and devastating the effects of the oncoming depression. But the immediate outcome – whether or not it will provide a. temporary respite in the current situation – still remains in doubt.
Here again, the answer will in large part depend on what happens in the sphere of retail trade, especially during the current Easter season.
 


 Civil war has issued out of the resistance to the Axis armies in Yugoslavia. We take sides in that civil war. Let us explain why.
The corruption, treachery and bankruptcy of the native ruling class had plunged the country into chaos in the period prior to the German occupation. The dominant section of Yugoslav landlords and capitalists pressed for a capitulation to Hitler. But the mass of the population was anti-Fascist and seething with revolt. Reports of peasant uprisings in Central Serbia, Montenegro and elsewhere came almost simultaneously with the signing on March 25, 1941 of a protocol of adherence to the Tripartite pact of the Axis.
It is as yet impossible to establish to what extent these uprisings were spontaneous and to what extent they were engineered by those elements in the army and in the population under the sway of Anglo-American or Stalinist diplomacy and their agencies. The likelihood is that the maneuvers at the top were supplemented by spontaneous action from below. In any case, the then reigning Cvetkovich cabinet and Regent were overthrown two days after they had joined the Axis. General Dusan Simovich was installed as Premier and Peter II, a boy of 17, proclaimed as ruler. This new government was immediately recognized by London and Washington. The Kremlin—with Molotov as Premier—signed a “non-aggression pact” with Simovich on April 5, 1941, that is, on the very eve of Hitler’s formal declaration of war against Yugoslavia. This recognition was hardly given than it was withdrawn—with Stalin as Premier—on May 9, 1941. Shortly after the USSR was invaded Stalin reaffirmed the recognition he had withdrawn. Since that time this position has again been reversed de facto.
The newly-formed Simovich government proved impotent to organize effective resistance to the German armies. The army had scarcely been equipped to fight by the previous regime. Now, in addition, resistance was sabotaged and betrayed by Yugoslavia’s own army tops, her landlords, capitalists and their agents. With this help, Hitler overran the country in a few days and was able to consolidate his Balkan base for the attack on the USSR, which came within two months. This fact proves the guerrilla resistance during this time in Yugoslavia was poorly organized, sporadic and on a scale too restricted to interfere seriously with the plans of the German High Command. Hitler’s occupation of Yugoslavia in April 1941 was an indispensable part of the German plan—which materialized in June—to invade the USSR.
A glance at the map suffices to show the strategic importance of this country which borders upon Hungary, Rumania, Bulgaria, Greece and Albania, let alone Italy and Germany (Austria). Without establishing control of Yugoslavia it is impossible to assure control of the Balkans. Hitler needed this control both for offensive and defensive reasons, as would any other power or combination of powers seeking to attack the Soviet Union. Without the Balkan base such an attack cannot be launched with any hope of success. Lacking this base, the attacking armies, especially those of Germany, would find their own flank exposed.
Conversely, many of the key problems of Soviet defense also hinge on the Balkans, Yugoslavia in particular, for whoever dominates this territory disposes of a powerful base flanking the USSR.
What supplied the impetus for the guerrilla movement in Yugoslavia? According to inspired dispatches from London, the credit belongs to Drazha Mikhailovich and his “Chetniks.” The Kremlin in its domestic publications as well as in its agencies abroad, especially the Daily Worker in this country, helped build up this legend of Mikhailovich which they are now working so hard to dispel. For example, as late as June 2, 1942, the Daily Worker featured Mikhailovich’s picture on its front page alongside of a report of a broadcast from “Free Yugoslavia,” the short wave radio station of the Partisan High Command. Even after this station had made public the news of major military clashes between the Partisans and Mikhailovich, the Daily Worker—on orders from Moscow—continued its line of building up Mikhailovich for almost two more months after June 2, 1942.
The artificial portrayal of Mikhailovich, “Chief of the Chetniks,” as organizer of real resistance to the fascist invaders, is part of an elaborate hoax. Whatever else may be obscure about the inter-relations between Mikhailovich and the Partisans, it is now admitted even by London that Mikhailovich’s role has been to restrain resistance in Yugoslavia rather than to promote it.
It is equally undeniable that a close connection exists between the resistance in Yugoslavia and the heroic resistance of the Red Army and the Soviet masses. The struggle and successes of the Red Army have acted from the beginning as a spur to the growing resistance in Yugoslavia and elsewhere in Hitler’s rear. The force of this resistance has fed upon and runs parallel to the course of the struggle of the USSR.   
The Scope of the Partisan Movement It was only after Hitler launched the assault upon the USSR that his serious trouble in Yugoslavia began. What amounts to an official Stalinist account of the development of guerrilla struggle is now available. It is given in the October 25, 1942, issue of Ogonek, a weekly published in Moscow:
“By autumn of 1941, the Partisan army, which then consisted of isolated detachments still functioning separately, already numbered from 80,000 to 100,000 fighters ... By the end of the year they had cleared of occupationist troops two-thirds of the territory of Serbia, more than half of Montenegro, a large section of Dalmatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina; and the organization of Partisan forces was begun. In Croatia, Slovenia and Slavonia.”
The winter successes of the Red Army in 1941 were accompanied, not only by the spread of resistance in Yugoslavia, but also by its coordination and centralization:
“The leadership of the Partisan movement widely utilized the winter months for reorganizing and replenishing the ranks of the people’s armed forces. Detachments were transformed into Partisan shock brigades and battalions. The High Command of the Partisan and Volunteer Armies was created; connections were established with the Partisan detachments operating in Albania and Greece.”
By the summer of 1942, the report continues, “the Partisans were operating with comparatively large military formations (shock brigades, battalions) equipped with artillery ... By this time, the Partisans also disposed of planes.”
There is ample evidence that the Red Army provided the impetus from outside and that the Kremlin actively intervened in organizing, supplying and seizing control of the Partisan movement in Yugoslavia.
If the impetus from without was provided by the Red Army, what, however, has invested the resistance within Yugoslavia with its undeniable power, whatever we may think of the details of the claims in the Stalinist press?
The nationalist element, “the rising of patriots against the invader,” has been the propaganda keynote coming not only from London but also from Moscow. Nationalism has doubtless played and will continue to play an important part in the development of Yugoslavia’s struggle. Unquestionably considerable sections of Yugoslavia’s 16 millions were initially impelled by their desire and need to throw off the invader’s yoke. It is no less obvious that the subjugated conditions of the country aided powerfully in a resurgence of nationalism. But this hardly touches the main problem. Under the existing conditions what were the actual channels into which the struggle against the invader could flow and through which it could unfold?
Generally speaking, all movements in society and all the key problems including those of “national liberation” are governed by and solved through the mechanism of classes and the dynamics of the class struggle. In occupied Europe the national question is fused intimately with the social. In the case of Yugoslavia the struggle against the occupying armies could not unfold without entering immediately into a head-on collision with the Axis collaborationists headed by the native landlords and capitalists and their central and local bureaucracy.
The Stalinists inside and outside the USSR have sought to hide the inspiring fact that, while ostensibly operating within the framework of “national liberation,” the guerrilla movement no sooner acquired a mass character than it inexorably proceeded to assume class struggle forms. This incontestable fact can be established from details in the reports in the capitalist and Stalinist press. For example, a Stockholm dispatch characteristic of the earliest stages of the struggle tells that: “approximately 40 Serbian guerrillas attacked an estate in western Croatia near Lokve Lika killing the landlord and the German soldiers there” (Daily Worker, September 7, 1941). In the course of such raids, the guerrillas burned all the grain and other supplies that they were unable to carry away or distribute among the population.
The same report also states that “coal mines in Lesljanah were systematically attacked by big detachments numbering up to 400 guerrillas who possessed field guns. The Croatian authorities were compelled to send out regular troops.” The genuine voice of the ruling class is heard in the very wording of the dispatch: The Croatian authorities, that is, the representatives of the native landowners, coal mine owners, etc., “were compelled” to defend their interests and even their lives by armed force.
That this was not an isolated incident is borne out by the official Moscow press:
“Partisan detachments attacked the occupationist garrisons, annihilated them, destroyed bridges, “blew up important industrial enterprises, burned the grain requisitioned from the population whenever the occasion did not permit its distribution among the starving peasants.” (Ogonek, October 25, 1942.)   
The Partisans vs. the “Democracies” The prerequisites for avoiding such clashes and checking the spread of class warfare is a rigid restriction of guerrilla activity, a policy of passivity. Such a policy of rejecting mass resistance is precisely the one followed by Mikhailovich, and supported by the Yugoslav Government-in-Exile. As C.L. Sulzberger cabled from London: “This accords with British theories of political and military warfare” (NY Times, January 31, 1943). Needless to say, Washington subscribes to the same theory. Their common aim is to defeat Hitler only on the basis of preserving capitalist property forms and relations. Whoever violates the latter in any shape or manner becomes the main enemy in place of Hitler.
Washington, London and their Yugoslavian satellites all oppose expanded guerrilla activity in Yugoslavia because it is necessarily accompanied by the extension and intensification of class warfare. Expanded guerrilla activity, which the Kremlin does require, has meant the continuation of the policy of confiscating food supplies which, when not destroyed, are distributed among the local population:
“Food from army stores captured by the guerrillas ... was distributed to the needy population.” (Daily Worker, July 26, 1942.)
“Flour ... was distributed to starving population.” (Idem)
On October 7, 1942, the Daily Worker reported that the guerrillas in Croatia had seized supplies of “requisitioned wheat” and had distributed “several carloads” among the peasants. “500 carloads of wheat ... were distributed among the population” (Daily Worker, November 21, 1942). This distribution of food, the largest yet reported, came on the eve of the creation of the central government of the Partisans in Bihac—The Anti-Fascist Soviet (Vece) of People’s Liberation in Yugoslavia.
Peasants in the localities controlled by the guerrillas have received “timber for building and for personal use without charge” (Daily Worker, July 26, 1942). Similar reports can be adduced to any number.
Naturally, the Yugoslav landlords and merchants who own these food supplies and timber lands are opposed to such measures. The formation of “White Guards” to combat the guerrillas was reported in the summer of 1941. Moscow has since then contended that Mikhailovich himself has organized these special “White Guard” detachments. Such a development is indicated by the logic of the situation itself.
The opposition of the capitalists is all the more bitter because the policy of the guerrillas even under Stalinist domination has gone far beyond partial seizures.
“In Slovenia the ‘Liberation Front’ has recently confiscated the property of Italian spies and traitors to the people and has distributed it among the peasant victims of the fascist terror ...” (Daily Worker, July 28, 1942).
It should be borne in mind that this policy of confiscation hits not only all Yugoslav landlords and capitalists who directly collaborate with the Axis, but also those who may support Mikhailovich and the Government-in-Exile. They too fall in the category of “traitors to the people.”
The wording of the Stalinist dispatch is a euphemistic way of describing agrarian revolution. The Yugoslav peasantry, land hungry for centuries, have seized the opportunity to divide the landlord’s estates. This irrepressible class conflict is fed by the survivals of feudal conditions in the country, especially in Bosnia and Herzegovina where reforms “abolishing” serfdom were introduced only in 1929. It is a fact that the Stalinist-controlled leadership of the Partisans has tried, if not to foster, then at least to supply a legal cover, for some of these land seizures.
No less drastic measures have been applied in other spheres of the country’s economic life. Expanded guerrilla activity has necessarily involved, as was stated, the destruction of bridges, railways and systems of communications; of plants and mines and, in some cases, the removal of machinery and equipment to the rear. It has entailed the confiscation of plants by the guerrillas. According to an eye-witness report, by the end of August 1941:
“Uzice was in our hands and here we [i.e., the guerrillas] had factories in which we ourselves produced different kinds of goods” (Slobodna Rech, March 2, 1943.)
Velimir Vlakhovich, whose various roles include that of accredited foreign correspondent of the Partisans in Moscow, has been permitted to cable from there that the Partisans have confiscated “banks and their funds in liberated towns.” He says:
“In Uzice [the first capital of the central government set up by the Partisans], they confiscated more than 10 million dinars. In large towns such as Chachack and Kralyevo, similar large sums were taken over. Large sums were also obtained by attacking Axis military and passenger trains.” (Daily Worker, February 2, 1943.)
The banks of course are owned by Yugoslav bankers, financiers and industrialists, who likewise must be the owners of the “large sums” seized on passenger trains.   
Why the Kremlin Backs the Partisans It is hardly necessary to dwell on the military necessity that drives the Kremlin to expand to the maximum guerrilla activity in Hitler’s rear, all the more so in the strategic Balkans. Immediate military needs are reinforced by long-term strategic requirements of Soviet defense. The Kremlin must secure the southern Balkan flank not only against Hitler but against its present allies just as, in the period of the Stalin-Hitler pact, it was driven to protect the northern flank in Finland against its then “ally.”
Just as Leon Trotsky used the Polish experience of 1939 as the key to the Finnish events that followed, so can we use the Finnish experience as the key to the current situation in Yugoslavia. During its adventure of 1939-40 the Kremlin sought to promote a civil war within Finland in preparation for its sovietization. It set up the “Workers’ and Peasants’ Government” of Kuusinen. But the Finnish Communist Party had little or no following among the masses. The civil war could not develop under Mannerheim’s bayonets. It was nipped in the bud. Leon Trotsky explained at the time:
“The military victory of Stalin over Finland would unquestionably have made possible an overthrow of property relations with more or less assistance from the Finnish workers and small farmers. Why then didn’t Stalin carry out this plan? Because a colossal mobilization of bourgeois public opinion began against the USSR. Because England and France seriously posed the question of military intervention. Finally—last but not least in importance—because Hitler could wait no longer. The appearance of English and French troops in Finland would have meant a direct threat to Hitler’s Scandinavian plans which were based on conspiracy and surprise. Caught in the vise of a two-fold danger—on one side from the Allies and from the other Hitler—Stalin renounced sovietizing Finland, limiting himself to the seizure of isolated strategical positions.” (In Defense of Marxism, pp.174-175.)
The conditions confronting Stalin in Yugoslavia are quite different and far more favorable than those which confronted him in Finland. The Kremlin is seeking to exploit the civil war in Yugoslavia—where the Communist Party still retains a mass following — through the establishment of a central government with a program which virtually duplicates that of Kuusinen’s puppet government.
While the Kuusinen Government was set up from on top and remained a paper creation of the Kremlin, the Partisan regime established in Yugoslavia has a mass base and represents a real power. The essence of the state consists in its apparatus of coercion. The shattering of the old state apparatus by the Yugoslav partisans signifies the attempt through civil warfare to install a new state. This process is delineated as follows in an official document of the Yugoslav partisans:
“In order to rally all of the population to carry on this difficult struggle against the occupationists, it is necessary to create such public organs which would best answer the demands of the situation, which will be nearest to the people/and which would take upon themselves all of the responsibility in the name of the people.
“The former gendarme, police and county apparatus cannot and do not answer the needs, because this apparatus is infested with elements of the enemy, because this apparatus up to now has been in the service of the occupationists, and the enemy still has influence on this apparatus through its agents. Aside from this, this apparatus does not enjoy the confidence of the people and is not suitable for the present critical days. We consider that the national liberation committees, which the people themselves are establishing, are at the present time the most suitable organs on which we can rely. (The Truth About Yugoslavia. A Documentary Record. Published in January 1943 in Pittsburgh, Pa., under the auspices of Louis Adamic, Zarko Bunich and other “Americans of Yugoslav Birth.” p.5.)
Under the Partisans the former authorities have been replaced by local committees, elected under a democratic procedure unprecedented in the Balkans. Based on these committees, the first central government was set up in August 1941 with its capital at Uzice, from which it was driven out by the combined forces of the occupationists and native fascists. A second existed for a short time in Kocevje, Slovenia. The third was established last November in Bihac, Bosnia, from which, according to the Daily Worker of February 16, it was driven out by “more than 100,000 German, Italian, Croatian fascists and Mikhailovich’s chetniks.”
This government, whose figurehead is one Dr. Ivan Ribar, still functions, arrogating to itself in the territories controlled by the Partisans all executive, legislative, juridical, police and military powers.
Mikhailovich and the pro-Allied Yugoslav clique in exile are of course irreconcilably opposed to this government. So are London and Washington. Stalin, while still recognizing de jure the Yugoslav Government-in-Exile, supports de facto the Ribar government. The class conflict in Yugoslavia, economic in its essence, thus asserts itself also in the international diplomatic and political spheres.
Every success of the Red Army adds new explosive power to the irrepressible conflict in Yugoslavia and spreads it beyond the boundaries. C.L. Sulzberger has just been permitted by the London censors to cable:
“Already beneath the conqueror’s rule explosions are creeping to the surface all over Eastern Europe. In Yugoslavia Left-Wing Partisan is combating Right-Wing Chetnik with the same savagery each has displayed against the Axis, and vice versa. In Poland much the same phenomenon goes on.” (New York Times Magazine, March 21, p.6.)
This is the first open confirmation of a civil war in Poland which is proceeding under the same Stalinist auspices as the one in Yugoslavia.
It requires a clear conception of the class nature of the Soviet Union and the parasitic role of the Stalinist bureaucracy to analyze correctly this seemingly unprecedented situation. The contradictory position of the Kremlin in Soviet society compels it today under the given conditions as yesterday in Poland, the Baltic countries and Bessarabia, to sponsor and support such revolutionary measures as the creation of a new state power in Yugoslavia; the confiscation of stocks of food, timber, landlords’ estates; the removal of machinery to the rear, the confiscation of factories, banks, etc.
In the period of the Stalin-Hitler pact, the Kremlin sovietized Eastern Poland, Bessarabia and the Baltic states. The Stalinist bureaucracy was compelled in the interests of self-preservation to extend the base of the first workers’ state. Thereby, as Leon Trotsky pointed out, the October revolution, whose remaining basic conquests are today being defended so heroically by the Soviet soldiers, workers, peasants and the youth, served notice to the world that it still lives.
Conditions in the present period of Stalin’s alliance with “democratic” imperialism differ from those in the days of the Stalin-Hitler pact. But the same fundamental forces arising out of the irreconcilable clash between Soviet economy and world imperialism are driving the bureaucratic caste to measures which are revolutionary in their objective consequences. The Stalinist bureaucracy depends for its own existence upon the maintenance of the workers’ state created by the October revolution. In desperation and as a last resort this bureaucracy has proved itself capable of so acting in self-defense as to stimulate revolutionary developments.   
Why We Support the Partisans How must revolutionary internationalists conduct themselves under these conditions? In accordance with the directives given by Trotsky to the Bolsheviks in eastern Poland:
“Together with the workers and peasants, and in the forefront, you must conduct a struggle against the landlords and capitalists; do not tear yourself away from the masses, despite all their illusions, just as the Russian revolutionists did not tear themselves away from the masses who had not yet freed themselves from their hopes in the Czar (Bloody Sunday, January 22, 1905); educate the masses in the course of the struggle, warn them against naive hopes in Moscow, but do not tear yourself away from them, fight in their camp, try to extend and deepen their struggle, and to give it the greatest possible independence.” (In Defense of Marxism, p.88.)
The record of Stalinism warns that the Kremlin clique at a later stage will try to restrain within its bureaucratic strait-jacket and to suppress the self-action of the revolutionary workers and peasants. With a new abrupt turn of events in the war and a radical shift in the relation of forces, Stalin is easily capable of making his peace with the Mikhailoviches just as he tried to do in the summer and autumn of 1941.
But given continued successes of the Red Army and a favorable relationship of forces vis-à-vis London and Washington, the sovietization of Yugoslavia along with sections of Poland and Eastern Europe is, even under Stalin, by no means excluded.
Preparatory steps in this direction have already been taken. In Moscow on August 11 and 12, 1941, there was organized “The All-Slav Rally.” This organization is far more elaborate than Kuusinen’s puppet regime intended for the sovietization of Finland. Its auxiliaries, “The Women’s Anti-Fascist Congress” and “The Anti-Fascist Youth Congress,” which were organized almost simultaneously, already have a considerable mass base not only in Eastern Europe and other occupied areas but among Slavic emigrants throughout the world.
The “democratic” chancellories are alarmed. A vast behind-the-scenes diplomatic struggle has been taking place since last autumn when, to combat Stalin’s new “Slav International,” London and Washington tried to set up a Catholic Slav bloc. Forty per cent of Yugoslavia’s population is Catholic. About the same proportion prevails in the Balkans while in Poland Catholics predominate. The Washington-London-Vatican plan is to establish this bloc in the Balkans through the reconstitution of the Habsburg monarchy. That is the meaning of the envisaged plans to invade Europe through the “soft under belly” of the Balkans. That is the meaning of the negotiations with the Vatican, the trip of Archbishop Spellman, the formation of the Habsburg Brigade in the United States, etc.
The revolutionary ferment which has manifested itself in Yugoslavia since the midsummer of 1941 is only in its initial stages. It has already brought to the fore all the fundamental problems of the European revolution. In its further development this workers’ and peasants’ movement can sweep over the heads not only of the Mikhailoviches and their allies but also of the Kremlin clique. The resistance of the guerrillas is reinforced by the struggle of the Red Army and, in turn reinforces the latter. With the growth of self-confidence among the Soviet and European masses, with the terrible suffering and accelerated pace of the war, with the growing realization of the blind alley of imperialist policies, the masses are being impelled toward the socialist solution of the world crisis.
It is becoming more and more clear to the people of Eastern Europe, as it will become on the morrow to western European peoples including Germany, that their sole salvation lies in making common cause with the masses of the USSR for the establishment of the Socialist United States of Europe.


 V.I. Lenin, Collected Works, Volume XIX International Publishers, New York. 463 pp. $2.50
This volume of Lenin’s Collected Works contains his speeches and writings for the year 1916 and the first three months of 1917. It was on the eve of the Russian revolution that Lenin made some of his most important contributions to Marxism. He wrote his classic analysis of imperialism which has long been translated into English. But a great deal of his writings during the war years, especially his pieces pertaining to the problem of nationalities in the imperialist epoch, have not been so readily available. By publishing this volume the Stalinists, who betrayed all the teachings of Lenin, have made an involuntary gift to the revolutionary movement.
Marx and Engels, the founders of scientific socialism, died before the entry of capitalism into its highest stage, that of imperialism, which is at the same time its stage of decay and death agony. They outlined the general tendencies of capitalist development. They forecast its decay and doom. What they did not and could not foresee were the specific characteristics of this stage and the shifts to the right and to the left that the actual course of events would introduce during this epoch. This work was done primarily by Lenin, and after him by Trotsky.
Marx and Engels thus left unsolved several problems arising from the extraordinary peculiarities of capitalism in its imperialist stage. Among these unsolved problems was the struggle of colonial and semi-colonial peoples for independence.
The Communist Manifesto contains no reference to this struggle. The omission was not an oversight on their part. Here is how Trotsky explained it in his article, The Ninetieth Anniversary of the Communist Manifesto:
“Inasmuch as Marx and Engels considered the socialist revolution in the leading civilized countries at least to be a matter of the next few years, the colonial question was resolved automatically for them, not in consequence of an independent movement of oppressed nationalities but in consequence of the victory of the proletariat in the metropolitan centers of capitalism.”
“The questions of revolutionary strategy,” continues Trotsky, “in colonial and semi-colonial countries are therefore not touched upon at all by the Manifesto. Yet these questions demand an independent solution. For example, it is quite self-evident that while the ‘national fatherland’ has become the baneful historical brake in advanced capitalist countries, it still remains a relatively progressive factor in backward countries compelled to struggle for an independent existence. ‘The Communists,’ declares the Manifesto, ‘everywhere support every revolutionary movement against the existing social and political order of things.’ The movement of the colored races against their imperialist oppressors is one of the most important and powerful movements against the existing order and therefore calls for the complete, unconditional and unlimited support on the part of the proletariat of the white race.” (New International, Feb. 1938.)
Marx and Engels left this problem unsolved but they also left behind them the indispensable method for its solution, namely, the Marxist dialectic. In the above-quoted article Trotsky stated: “The credit for developing revolutionary strategy for the oppressed nationalities belongs primarily to Lenin.”
Lenin’s teachings on imperialism and on the national and colonial question are the product of years of study of developing events and the application of the Marxist method toward their analysis and clarification. Although considerable work had been accomplished — especially under Ryazanov, the former head of the Marx-Engels-Lenin Institute who was purged by Stalin—in studying the background of Lenin’s work in this period, the present volume is issued without any introduction or notes to speak of. Least known is the background of Lenin’s work on the problem of nationalities.   
The Iskra Period Lenin began working on the national question in the period of the Iskra, that is, in 1900-03, even before the appearance of Bolshevism as an independent political tendency within the Russian labor movement. His writings for this period comprise five articles. Three of them are devoted to a polemic against the Bundists who demanded “complete autonomy” for the Bund on all questions relating to the Jewish people in the empire of the Czars. The dispute between Lenin and the Bundists centered at that time around the building of the proletarian party in Russia. Concessions to the Bund’s position would have made impossible the existence of a party based on democratic centralism. Lenin’s attitude is clearly revealed by the titles of his articles: Does the Jewish Proletariat Need an Independent Political Party?, The Position of the Bund in the Party; and (a speech delivered at the Second Party Congress in 1903) On the Place of the Bund in the Party. Of the remaining two articles, the more important one is entitled, The National Question in Our Program. Lenin’s attention was first attracted to the problem of nationalities because it confronted him on a national scale and as an internal party problem.
Lenin began to work systematically in this sphere only after the 1905 revolution, or more precisely, seven years later in 1912.
There were three main reasons for this.
First, as a consequence of the triumph of Czarist reaction following the 1905 defeat, all national issues in Russia were gravely sharpened. This in turn led to a resurgence of nationalist movements among the oppressed peoples under Czarism.
Second, flowing directly from the preparations for the impending imperialist dog-fight, there was an extreme aggravation of all national relations in Europe.
Third, the awakening of Asiatic peoples prior to the First World War. The liberationist movement of the East is just as new as the twentieth century itself. It was not until the turn of our century that countries like China and India—these classic examples of centuries-old stagnation—began to emerge on the world arena as independent political forces and revolutionary factors. The Russian revolution of 1905 was the most important single event which set the Eastern peoples in motion. The years immediately following 1905 witnessed revolutionary ferment in countries like Turkey and Persia. In September 1911 the Manchu Dynasty was overthrown in China and more than 450 million workers, coolies and peasants entered for the first time into the revolutionary flood. In the same period we find the beginnings of ferment in India, of which the current events are a direct continuation. Similarly, a nationalist movement under the banner of Islam was under way in the Dutch East Indies. Something no one had foreseen was taking place: colonial peoples were launching a revolutionary struggle for national independence before the proletariat in advanced countries of Europe had succeeded in solving their socialist tasks.
The problem which had at the outset confronted Lenin on a national scale and as an internal party problem now appeared before him as a world political problem. The dialectic, it will be observed, was at work both in Lenin’s mind and in living reality.
Lenin grasped before anyone else the crucial meaning of the liberationist movement of the Eastern peoples. In May 1913 he wrote these prophetic words:
“A new zone of world history has been opened at the beginning of the twentieth century by the awakening of Asia and by the beginnings of the struggle for power on the part of the advanced proletariat of Europe.”
Six years later in 1919, the newly-founded Communist International will inscribe on its banner this immortal formula in its most finished form: “We live in the epoch of imperialist wars, proletarian revolutions and colonial uprisings.”   
The Gist of Lenin’s Position In elaborating his position on the national question in the pre-1914 years, Lenin had to conduct a struggle on two fronts: on one side, against the opportunism and chauvinism of the Mensheviks (chiefly the Bundists and Georgian Mensheviks); and, on the other, against the deviation of the Polish party which, under Rosa Luxemburg’s influence, adopted an entirely false position. The Polish party began by underestimating the importance of the national problem in Poland and ended by denying altogether the very possibility of national struggles under imperialism. From this flowed their rejection of the slogan of the right of self-determination. After the outbreak of the war in 1914 this standpoint found its expression even within the ranks of the Bolsheviks themselves (Bukharin, Pyatakov and others). The most striking thing about Lenin’s polemics of 1912-14 is that they anticipate all the fundamental questions of revolutionary strategy which were posed in their full scope only by the war itself.
The First World War revealed completely the importance of the problem of nationalities from the proletarian standpoint by speeding up those processes which everywhere tend to merge national problems more and more closely with the social. It is only natural that we find Lenin writing so extensively on this question during the war. In 1916 Lenin developed in full programmatic form his views on the problem of nationalities in the imperialist epoch. This programmatic document bears the title, The Socialist Revolution and the Right of Nations to Self-Determination.
The title itself is ample proof that Lenin never approached the national question separate and apart from the proletarian struggle for socialism. He always subordinated the former to the latter. Today the Stalinists have not only severed the two but have betrayed completely the socialist struggle. They lie to the workers that only the Axis powers are waging imperialist war whereas the “democratic” imperialists are conducting wars of “national liberation.” They have finally published volume XIX only to dupe the workers into believing that they still speak in Lenin’s name. But Lenin in these writings said just the opposite of what the Stalinists are now saying about the kind .of epoch we are living in, and, in particular, about the national question.
We single out Lenin’s 1916 theses because of their historical and theoretical importance. In Marxist literature they are commonly referred to as the Sotsial Demokrat Theses, because they were first published as the position of the Sotsial Demokrat, then the central organ of the Bolsheviks. They were adopted by the majority of the Bolshevik Central Committee and therefore represent the official position of Bolshevism. This position was defended throughout the war by Lenin against the ultra-lefts in the various countries as well as against the social patriots. The social patriots were at that time also “in favor” of self-determination and supported the imperialists essentially under the same pretext as do the Stalinists today, namely, that the imperialist war was being waged to defend the “national fatherland” or effect “national liberation.”
To understand Lenin’s approach to the problem of nationalities it is above all necessary to bear in mind that Lenin’s method, the Marxist dialectic, prohibits the assertion that national problems are combined with the social in the same way in every country in the world. “The truth is always concrete.”
Lenin had to explain this time and again. Even after the October revolution there was a conflict on the national question in the Bolshevik Party. Bukharin, supported behind the scenes by Stalin, opposed the recognition of the right of self-determination for the nationalities within the young Soviet Republic. Bukharin and Stalin wanted to limit the right of self-determination to the workers among these nationalities. Pyatakov, taking the most extreme position, opposed self-determination on principle. At the Eighth Party Congress in March 1919, Lenin delivered a speech in which he explained to Stalin-Bukharin-Pyatakov the gist of the Marxist approach to the national question.
“While the different nations are marching along the same historical route, they traverse it with many zigzags and detours which are varied in the extreme, and, furthermore, the more cultured nations traverse this route in an obviously different manner from those on a lower cultural level.”
Any other position brushes aside the unevenness of the historical process and disregards the specific stage of development through which a given country is passing. All these factors have a direct and decisive bearing both upon the manner in which the national and social problems combine in each given case, as well as upon the immediate tasks of workers in the given country.
Lenin taught us to differentiate between no less than three types of countries in relation to the problem of nationalities. Thesis 6 of his 1916 document reads as follows:
“In this respect, countries must be divided into three main types:
“First, the advanced capitalist countries of Western Europe and the United States of America. In these countries the bourgeois, progressive national movements came to an end long ago. Every one of these ‘great’ nations oppresses other nations in the colonies and within its own country. The tasks of the proletariat of these ruling nations are the same as those of the proletariat in England in the nineteenth century in relation to Ireland.
“Secondly, Eastern Europe: Austria, the Balkans and particularly Russia. Here it was the twentieth century that particularly developed the bourgeois-democratic national movements and intensified the national struggle. The tasks of the proletariat in these countries in regard to the consummation of their bourgeois-democratic transformation as well as in regards to assisting the socialist revolution in other countries—cannot be achieved unless it champions the right of nations to self-determination. In this connection the most difficult but most important task is to merge the class struggle of the workers in the oppressing nations with the class struggle of the workers in the oppressed nations.
“Thirdly, the semi-colonial countries, like China, Persia, Turkey and all the colonies, which have a combined population amounting to a billion. In these countries the bourgeois-democratic movements have either hardly begun, or are far from having been completed. Socialists must not only demand the unconditional and immediate liberation without compensation—and this demand in its political expression signifies nothing more nor lese than the recognition of the right to self-determination—but must render determined support to the more revolutionary elements in the bourgeois-democratic movements for national liberation in these countries and assist their rebellion—and if need be, their revolutionary war against the imperialist powers that oppress them.” (Works, English edition, Vol.XX, pp.64-56.)
Every serious article or statement concerning the national and colonial question made in the Communist International under Lenin and Trotsky or subsequently in the Fourth International never failed to restate the fundamental ideas contained in the Sotsial Demokrat Theses.
At first glance it might appear that in 1916 Lenin still left unsolved what he referred to as the task of merging “the class struggle of the workers in the oppressing nations with the class struggle of the workers in the oppressed nations.” This is true only in the sense that the credit for the full solution of this particular task belongs to Trotsky, who advanced in September1914 the slogan of the Socialist United States of Europe. This slogan was included originally in the Sotsial Demokrat Theses but was later rejected by Lenin for purely tactical considerations. It was formally adopted in 1923 by the Communist International and was rejected by Stalin and his clique only after Lenin’s death.
Why is it necessary to differentiate between the oppressed European countries and the Eastern peoples? Because in Europe the irreconcilable contradiction between imperialism and the needs of all European peoples must be resolved on an entirely different and a far higher stage of development from that in colonies and semi-colonies. In Europe, unlike the Eastern countries, imperialism has developed productive forces to such a point that they are strangled within he respective national boundaries. In Europe not only imperialism but also the national state itself acts as a brake upon further progress.
“Europe,” as Trotsky explained long ago, “is not only a geographical term but constitutes a certain economic and cultural- historic unit.” (The Program of Peace, Works, Russian Edition, Vol.II, p.478.)
In this same programmatic document written by Trotsky in May 1917 and circulated as a text book in the Communist International in Lenin’s lifetime, it is stated: “The prerequisite for the self determination of the large and small European nations is the state unification of Europe itself.” (Idem, p.472). That is why, following Lenin and Trotsky, we advance today the slogan of the Socialist United States of Europe as the only genuine solution for the national problem there.
In his 1916 theses Lenin insisted that correct revolutionary strategy sets immediate historic tasks for workers in Eastern countries which differ profoundly from the tasks of the European workers. This difference in revolutionary tasks derives from the belated appearance of the Eastern peoples on the historical arena. The progressive character of the struggle of such countries for national independence, even under the leadership of the native bourgeoisie, flows from the irreconcilable contradiction between imperialist rule and the material and cultural needs of these Eastern peoples. Imperialism acts as a monstrous brake upon their economic and cultural development. That is why, following Lenin and Trotsky, we advance the slogan of national liberation for the Eastern peoples. That is why we support the struggles of China and India unconditionally.
The period of the Third International, or to be more precise, the period of the first four Congresses (1919-22) is the period of Lenin’s final work on the national and colonial question. His theses on this question were adopted by the Second World Congress in 1920. While reporting at this Congress on The Tactic of the Russian Communist Party, Lenin declared that he wished “once again at this point to emphasize the importance of colonial movements.”
“It is quite clear,” he continued, “that in the impending decisive battles of the world revolution, the movement of the majority of the population on our planet, which is initially directed toward national liberation, will turn against capitalism and imperialism and it will perhaps play a much mom revolutionary role than we all expect. It is important to underscore that we in our International have for the first time begun to prepare for this struggle. Naturally, there are a great many difficulties in this enormous sphere, but in any case the movement is advancing and the masses of toilers and peasants in the colonial countries, notwithstanding he fact that they are still very backward, will play a very great revolutionary role in the next phases of the world revolution.” (Works, First Russian Edition, Vol.XVIII, part I, p.299.)
Prophetic words!
Lenin died before the first of these great revolutionary struggles erupted in China. The Chinese revolution of 1925-27 was defeated. For this defeat Stalinism bears the responsibility. But a defeated revolution is still a revolution. It left neither China nor the rest of the Orient as they were before. The repercussions of this world-historic event, the first in the series predicted by Lenin, are today unfolding before our eyes in the Orient under the impact of the Second World War.
Trotsky’s work on the problem of nationalities parallels that of Lenin from 1903 to 1917. It merges with the latter in the first period of the Russian revolution and the first four Congresses of the Communist International. It represents a direct continuation and extension of it after Lenin’s death. The Stalinists are the only ones who ever claimed that there were fundamental disagreements in this respect between Trotsky and Lenin. Trotsky remained to his death a consistent orthodox Leninist on the national and colonial question. This is not difficult to prove even from the standpoint of formulations.
For example, in 1934, our movement adopted theses entitled The War and the Fourth International.
In this basic and programmatic document written by Trotsky it is stated:
“A special and important place is occupied by the question of colonial and semi-colonial countries of the East which are even BOW fighting for the independent national state. Their struggle is doubly progressive: tearing backward peoples from Asiatism, sectionalism and foreign bondage, they strike powerful blows at the imperialist states.” (Thesis 16—Our emphasis.)
Trotsky’s formulation of 1934 differs from that of Lenin in 1916 in phraseology but not in essential ideas. Our document assigns a “special place” to colonies and semi-colonies. Lenin referred to them as a type, expressing the self-same idea in other words.
In assigning a special role to the Eastern peoples or referring to them as a type, we thereby take cognizance of the fact that they are backward peoples, still remaining, like China and India, in conditions of pre-capitalist societies. In this way we also recognize that imperialism retards their economic and cultural development. In this way we express in most general form the peculiarities of their historical development, and draw the same conclusions that Lenin did in 1916.
“The national policy of Lenin,” wrote Trotsky, “will find its place among the eternal treasures of mankind.”



IN DEFENSE OF MARXISM – Against the Petty-Bourgeois Opposition
by Leon Trotsky
Pioneer Publishers, 116 University Place, New York, N. Y., 1943. Pp. 211+XXI
Cloth $2.00. Paper cover $1.50.
Since Lenin died nineteen years ago there have been many attempts to install one form of revisionism or another in place of Marxism, the doctrine of the proletarian revolution. In the sphere of thought these eddies reproduced the maelstrom of imperialist reaction in the interval between the two world wars. Revisionist ideas have their deepest roots in the petty bourgeoisie. The reasons for it were long ago laid bare by Marx.
“The petty bourgeois,” he explained in 1865, “is always composed of ‘On-the-One-Hand’ and ‘On-the-Other-Hand.’ Two contradictory tendencies dominate his economic interest and therefore his politics, his scientific, religious and esthetic views. It is so in his morals, in everything. He is a living contradiction.”
In his perpetual condition of indecision, vacillation and instability, the petty bourgeois, when confronted with the titanic tasks and events of our epoch, falls at the first blow from the summits of revolutionary exaltation to abysmal moods of cynicism, despair and panic. Revisionist attempts, in essence, represent a series of petty bourgeois capitulations, each more degrading than the one before, to the imperialist bourgeoisie.
Leon Trotsky’s last book contains the articles and letters written by him in the heat of the struggle – from August 1939 to April 1940 – against the revisionist minority in the Socialist Workers Party. In addition, there are articles and letters following the split. The final letter in this book was written on August 17, 1940, three days before the GPU assassin struck him down. This was no passing struggle. The issues involved were neither local, episodic nor tertiary. As Trotsky correctly characterized it in his Open Letter to Burnham:
“It is a question of nothing more or less than an attempt to reject, disqualify and overthrow the theoretical foundations, the political principles and organizational methods of our movement.”
Precisely because the struggle was so deep-going and all-inclusive in its character, these writings, and letters of Leon Trotsky are of historical and international significance. Concentrated in them are the experiences, lessons and traditions of all the previous great struggles against revisionism – struggles in which successive generations of proletarian revolutionists received their basic training.
Trotsky participated personally in all of them save the first, namely the one waged – a year before Trotsky was born – by Engels in 1877-78 (Anti-Duehring). Already as a youth at the beginning of this century, Trotsky took part in the international struggle against the Western European revisionists (Bernstein & Co.), and later in Lenin’s epic battles against the Russian varieties of revisionism: the “Legal Marxism” of Professors Struve-Bulgakov & Co., Economism, Menshevism, the Neo-Machism of Bogdanov & Co., etc. In the theoretical fight against the Russian Mensheviks Trotsky played a leading role next only to that of Lenin. Then came the crucial battles against the social-chauvinists during the first World War. The fight against the opportunists (revisionists) of the Second International continued during and after the Russian revolution of 1917 when Trotsky fought side by side with Lenin. After Lenin’s death, Trotsky, at the head of the Russian Left Opposition (1923-29), battered down the whole structure of Stalinist revisionism and falsification within the Third International. It was this unequalled experience combined with his sure mastery of the theoretical weapons forged by Marx, Engels and Lenin that Trotsky turned full-blast in the last year of his life, against the latter-day revisionists who had arisen within his own movement.
In richness and diversity of content only one other Marxist classic matches this volume, Friedrich Engels’ Herr Eugen Duehring’s Revolution in Science (Anti-Duehring). For the scope and extent of Trotsky’s last struggle against revisionism involved not only the burning political issues of the day (the defense of the Soviet Union, the Soviet-Finnish war, the character of the second World War, etc.) but the whole domain of Marxist thought and practice, from the plane of organization principles of Bolshevism to the peaks of theory, from a dissection of clique politics to the brilliant summation of dialectical materialism.
This is a manual above all for the revolutionary youth of the whole world. By steeping themselves in it and using it as a guide they will assure themselves from the outset of a schooling in the traditions of Marxism, the greatest of which is: the unyielding and implacable defense of ideas, of the principles conquered in life-and-death struggles. These principles are the sole foundation upon which it is possible to build the principal instrument of the revolution – the proletarian party. That is why genuine Marxists have always met head-on and fully settled accounts with all attempts at revisionism. In a way worthy of the tradition of our masters, Trotsky carries out the task in this book.
The very publication of In Defense of Marxism is, again, in the great Marxist tradition of fully documenting our fights, thus explaining to the end what we are, what we stand for, what decisions we arrive at, what are the issues in the fight and what the political reasons are for all our unifications and splits. Our movement has absorbed this tradition into its blood and marrow. It is our richest heritage. It is what the Bolshevik Left Wing did when they split from the Second International during the last war. The polemical writings of Lenin and Trotsky against the social-chauvinist majority, before the split, became the programmatic documents of the new movement which arose from the split. The same course was followed by the Trotskyist Left Opposition in the struggle against the Stalinized Communist International. Trotsky’s polemics against Stalinism from 1923 on – The New Course, Lessons of October, Criticism of the Draft Program of the Comintern, his articles against the Anglo-Russian Committee, his articles on China and the rest of that precious material – educated the cadres of the new world movement. From the day of its proclamation in 1933, the Fourth International has never swerved from the path of fully documenting all its struggles. This is one of the primary considerations for publishing this volume and for the publication of companion volumes scheduled for the immediate future.
In each of the struggles against revisionism it was the revisionist majority that tried to suppress the basic documents in the fights, and it remained for the seceding sections to make them available and known to the world. In the present instance it was the revisionists who were in the minority and seceded. But unlike the revolutionary fighters, they make no effort whatever to publish their documents. Nothing is so self-indicting and annihilating to the “Workers Party” as this fact. They have yet to explain their separate existence! The task has to be performed for them by others.
The principal document of the opposition, Science and Style – mimeographed and circulated by them during the fight and since then pocketed – is published for the first time as an appendix to this volume. There is a reason for this self-suppression. It is manifestly not convenient for them to reveal on what shabby ideological grounds they based their struggle and their subsequent split. As Trotsky pointed out, throughout the fight they refused to give battle on principled grounds. Because of this they now hide their own documents and find themselves in a position – certainly an anomaly for a seceding group – of leaving the causes for the split without any serious theoretical and political explanation. Instead from time to time, in passing, they offer as reasons for the split only fables and nursery bogies: “Cannon kicked us out!” “We are such civilized, cultured and moral individuals as could never survive in a bureaucratic jungle like the Socialist Workers Party!” And so forth and so on.
Therefore it is not surprising that these people who sometimes refer to themselves as “Trotskyists” are unable to find time on their hands or space in their publications to review this manual of Trotskyism by one who up till now has been considered the first authority on the subject. If they attempted to review Trotsky’s book they would be obliged to give an appraisal of their chief programmatic document in the struggle, Professor Burnham’s, Science and Style, upon which they have so long maintained a dignified silence, and which, as has already been said, is reprinted in the appendix to Trotsky’s book.
In Defense of Marxism has been hailed enthuiastically by the revolutionary youth and is being studied assiduously by all serious students of the movement. Within the few weeks since its publication this indispensable manual of Marxism has already achieved an international circulation. We feel certain that our co-thinkers all over the world will not only disseminate it as widely as possible but will exert their energies to translate it into the native languages of their respective countries.
Pioneer Publishers is to be congratulated on the historic service performed by its publication in English.



What To Do With Italy
by Gaetano Salvemini and George LaPiana, 1943
Duell, Sloan and Pearce, New York. $3.50
It has been the lot of liberals, literally from their very first appearance on the historical scene, to find the search for truth to be the most embarrassing of all human pursuits. The glaring discrepancy between their views and reality has bared itself constantly, especially in times of great social stress. If during periods of relative stability they found it necessary to apologize at regular intervals for themselves and the world, then in our generation, this has become almost a daily ordeal.
Liberals, above all liberal academicians, have solved this contradiction by enlisting as the most ignoble servants of reaction, and becoming the most vicious practitioners of the lie. Salvemini and LaPiana, however, have remained loyal to the old doctrine of liberalism. These two noted Italian scholars, refugees from Mussolini’s thugs and now teachers of history at Harvard University, are among the few living academicians who still retain a modicum of respect for truth; and in dealing with events do not by and large hesitate to set down the actual facts alongside of their opinions and interpretations.
With the futile and outworn equipment of nineteenth century liberalism, they, in their latest book, still try to oppose the onrush of reaction and to solve the burning and unpostponable problems of our day, among which they correctly put the problem of “what to do with Italy.”
Let us see how the logic of events squares with the logic of liberalism.
 
Italy: 1918–1921
Italy entered the last war as a democracy and emerged from it, in the camp of the victors, still a democracy. In 1914-1918 capitalism in Italy and throughout the world had behind it not the years of economic stagnation and crisis that mark the interval between the two world wars, but several decades of relatively uninterrupted growth and prosperity. Capitalist democracy had therefore far more favorable conditions for demonstrating its viability in Italy after World War I than is the case today when, after 21 years of fascism, the country turns up a captive of the rival imperialist camp. But Salvemini and LaPiana argue to the contrary. They see a great future for a “democratic revolution” in Italy.
They have learned nothing from the events of 1918–1921 when the Italian democracy proved itself incapable of solving a single major problem during the post-war crisis that gripped the country. The Italian masses were then compelled to seek their own solution, just as is the case today. They rallied to the program of socialism.
The Italian Socialist Party which had 47,000 members in 1914 grew to more than 250,000 by 1920. The number of organized workers under the party’s influence and direction leaped from 300,000 in 1914 to more than 2,000,000 in 1920. Even these significant figures and tempos of growth do not reflect quite fully the mighty surge of the Italian masses toward the socialist solution. In 1920 the workers seized the factories; the peasants were dividing the landlord’s estates. Demoralization and panic prevailed among the ruling class. All the conditions obtained for an easy victory for the revolution, except one: a genuine revolutionary leadership.
It is precisely at this point, however, that our authors, in summing up these events, substitute a liberal fiction for historical reality. They maintain:
“The social revolution which had been feared did not take place only because the rank and file of the Italian people did not want it ... The failure to carry on a revolution when it would have met with little or no resistance was in itself evidence of the common sense of the mass of the Italian people.” (Page 59. Our emphasis.)
The “people who did not want it” were actually engaged in making the social revolution. The ruling classes who most certainly did not want the revolution were powerless to prevent it. “It would have met with little or no resistance.” Why then was it not carried through? Was it because the revolution was left leaderless at the height of the crisis? Was it because the treachery of the social democratic leaders had caught the masses off-guard, paralyzed their self-action, and permitted passivity, disorganization and demoralization to set in? According to Salvemini and LaPiana, to answer these questions in the affirmative is to deny “common sense” to the Italian people.
 
The Fascist Counter-Revolution
What happened in Italy after the betrayal of the revolution by the Social Democratic leaders?
Our authors now return from the domain of liberal mythology to that of historical facts. They write:
“... The capitalists thought that the time had come to make the masses pay for the scare they had suffered and played ball with the Fascist hoodlums; the Nationalists, a noisy crowd of pseudo-intellectuals who had regarded the Fascists with contempt, now shook hands with them and joined in the fray; and, last but not least, the politicians who were in the government cast a benevolent eye upon these paladins of reaction and let the military chiefs, the police, and the courts more or less openly assist the Fascists in their criminal exploits.” (Page 60.)
This is the truth. The monarchy, the army, the courts, the police, all the government politicians “played ball with the Fascist hoodlums.” The entire state apparatus was placed at the disposal of fascism, in so far as this was possible at each stage. The finances were provided by Italian Big Business. Salvemini and LaPiana write:
“. . . We may say that the entire large class reactionaries and conservatives, big business men, bankers, great landowners, the upper clergy, aristocrats of wealth and title, and a large section of the upper bourgeoisie were from the beginning or became afterwards, with few exceptions, firm supporters of the Fascist regime. It is enough to glance over the list of Fascist officialdom, especially of the podesta, or administrators of cities and towns; there, side by side with those of the Fascist parvenus, we find most of the names registered in the heraldry of Italy.” (Pages 166–167)
Again,
“What Italy went through in that period from the fall of 1920 to the fall of 1926 was really a civil war in which the Italian people were betrayed: by the wealthy class which created the new Fascism; by the army generals and officers who supplied Fascist bands with weapons, ammunition and trucks; by the Giolitti government (and the ministers who followed him – J.G.W.) which allowed the Fascists to carry on their so-called punitive expeditions under the disguised protection of the police and with Impunity from the courts; and finally, by the Monarchy which in the end abandoned the country to the Fascists as a conquered territory.” (Pages 58–59)
Further,
“The fact is that it took Fascism six years of unequal struggle between a power which had at its disposal all the resources of the government, the police, the militia, and the Monarchy on the one hand, and, on the other, a reluctant people whose labor organizations had been wiped out, whose leaders had either betrayed them by going over to the enemy, or had been murdered, forced to flee, or merely rendered helpless by sweep of events.” (Page 61)
“The fact is ...” Yes, these are the facts. They have been recorded, as our authors point out, “again and again in many languages by reliable historians,” among them by Salvemini himself in this and three other books: The Fascist Dictatorship in Italy; Under the Axe of Fascism; Italian Fascism.
 
The Mind of a Liberal
The complicity of capitalist democracy in bringing fascism to power in Italy is impossible to deny. How then can anyone retain faith in so rotten a system? Very simply: by using the old subterfuge of explaining facts away psychologically when it is too embarrassing to explain them politically.
Years ago, fascism used to be explained away by such banalities as “war psychosis,” “post-war neuroses,” and similar pseudo-scientific verbiage. Salvemini and LaPiana now serve up a hardly superior current variety:
“A strange combination of muddy thinking and cheap Machiavellianism got hold of various groups ...” Or, “they all cherished the illusion ...” Or, “mistakes and blunders” were committed. “Strange mystery ...” “Unfathomable mystery ...” The latter expressions are reserved for those emergencies when events descend with crushing force and nothing remains for our scholars except to throw up their hands in perplexity, horror and despair.
Strange combinations, muddy thoughts, cheap Machiavellianism, blunders, mysteries, illusions and lamentations dance through their pages. These are gloomy companions of a disturbed imagination at odds with reality.
What staggers the Italian liberals the most is that so many seemingly splendid people “play ball with Fascism,” and condone any and all deals with reaction.
If fascism won in Italy thanks to the treachery of the social democracy and the aid of the “democratic” state at home, then Mussolini’s regime was able to sustain itself only thanks to the aid of the “democracies” abroad. This, too, the book affirms:
“Six years of struggle (1920–1926) which would have ended in the victory of the people, if Fascism, besides having the support of such groups and classes In Italy as we have here described had not been protected and aided also by powerful forces outside Italy.” (Page 61)
What were these forces?
“It seems that the two countries in which Mussolini and his Fascism achieved the greatest success in publicity and popularity were England and the United States.” (Page 61)
In Engand and the United States, statesmen and bankers, diplomats and corporation heads, professors and corporation lawyers, politicians and journalists, judges and intellectuals, Catholic priests and Protestant laymen, in short the entire galaxy of “democracy,” sang the “praises of Mussolini and Fascism on all occasions.”
Profoundly symbolic of the class connection between Big Business, “democracy” and fascism is the fact that Myron Taylor, former head of United States Steel Corporation, had hanging in his office side by side the inscribed photographs of Franklin D. Roosevelt and – Benito Mussolini.
Salvemini and LaPiana select from hundreds of other instances. For example, in 1923 Otto H. Kahn, head of the Wall Street banking house of Kuhn, Loeb and Co., hailed Mussolini as a “great man, beloved and revered in his country, a self-made man ... no enemy of liberty ... no dictator in the generally understood sense of the word ...”
“I feel certain,” Kahn added, “that American capital invested in Italy will find safety, encouragement, opportunity and reward.”
Dr. Nicholas Murray Butler, President of Columbia University and one-time winner of the Nobel Prize for Peace, gratefully accepted Mussolini’s friendship and decorations. He paid homage to fascism as a “form of government of the very first order of excellence”; and found it “safe to predict that just as Cromwell made modern England, so Mussolini would make modern Italy.”
English statesmen never failed the Duce.
“In the chain of events which permitted Mussolini to strengthen his dictatorship, England played a conspicuous part. Prime Minister Baldwin and Foreign Minister Curzon helped Mussolini, in 1923, to save his face after his criminal attack on Corfu. At the time of the crisis brought about by the Matteoti murder, while Italy was seething with indignation and Fascism was on the verge of ruin, the English foreign minister, Sir Austen Chamberlain in December 1924, made the move of paying an official visit to the Duce. It was the first time that such a dignitary of the English government had ever condescended to pay such a compliment to Italy. The English minister rushed ostentatiously to shake the hand of the Duce which was at that moment, in the opinion of the Italians, wet with Matteoti’s blood.” (Page 71)
 
Churchill and Mussolini
Churchill’s eloquence soared on many occasions in paeans to the man he now so righteously contemns. In January 1927, Churchill said in an interview, “If I were an Italian I would don the Fascist Black Shirt.” In 1931 he acclaimed the “monumental work of Mussolini.” In September 1938 he discovered that Mussolini towered above Washington and Cromwell; and in passing praised the Italian king for his acumen in accepting fascism. In 1940, with England already at war, he told the Italian people that the Duce was “a great man.”
Let us add that Mussolini was the recipient not only of plaudits, diplomatic favors, etc., but also of hard cash. For instance, when the fascist regime was caught in 1925 in the vice of a desperate financial crisis, a consortium of American bankers headed by J. P. Morgan floated, on behalf of the Italian government, a loan of $100,000,000. Mussolini was enabled to stabilize both the lira and his regime.
All this barely scrapes the surface of the “democratic” record vis à vis Italian fascism. The book infers as much.
Still another powerful international force protected and aided Mussolini. This was the Vatican.
Salvemini and LaPiana devote more than one-fourth of their volume to the analysis of the Holy See’s role and devious policy in support of Mussolini. They say correctly:
“No historian, whether of the present or of the future, will be able to understand and explain fully the many Fascist successes in international affairs without taking into account the friendly relations between the Vatican and the Fascist dictatorship.” (Page 81)
Inside Italy, the Vatican moved cautiously at first. Mussolini received his initial favors from the Catholic Church in this country. Citing official sources, the authors prove this to the hilt. On page 68, they write:
“In 1924, Cardinal O’Connell of Boston, while the civil war was going on in Italy, stated that ‘Italy was in process of undergoing a marvelous transformation since Benito Mussolini bad seized the reigns of government ... I have never in my life witnessed a change so impressing. I see perfect order, cleanliness, work, industrial development (Progresso Italo-Americano, January 3, 1924).’
“In 1926, Cardinal O’Connell accepted a high Fascist decoration and, in his address of thanks to Mussolini’s representative, he stated: ‘Mussolini is a genius in the field of government, given to Italy by God ...’ (Il Carroccio XXXIV, p. 553.)”
 
The Vatican and Mussolini
In 1925, Cardinal Mundelein, the Archbishop of Chicago, stated in an interview that “Mussolini is a great big man, the man of the time.” In October 1926, Cardinal Dougherty, the Archbishop of Philadelphia, referred to the “admirable work of the Duce and the Fascist government.” Cardinal Hayes of New York accepted four high decorations from the Duce and each time expressed high praise to the donor.
These statements and actions are typical of innumerable others made by the highest dignitaries of the Catholic hierarchy, not to mention mere archbishops, bishops, or priests, friars, monks and nuns, or the editors of hundreds of Catholic diocesan bulletins, newspapers and periodicals.
This flood of support and adulation turned into a tidal wave after Pope Pius XI stated on December 20, 1926 that Mussolini had been sent by Divine Providence.
It would take us too far afield, even to summarize succinctly the wealth of material gathered by the authors concerning the relations between the Holy See and fascism and contained in the best chapter of this book. (See Chapter IV. The Vatican.) Nor would such a summary do justice to the scholarship and courage of the authors in following the Vatican step by step through the years of fascist rule. But one additional fact is worth noting.
On June 13 of this year, the Pope delivered, in person, an address to 25,000 Italian workers “gathered in Rome from various parts of the country, especially from Northern Italy.” Salvemini and LaPiana point out that all the assembled workers who “heard the papal address could not fail to understand that the whole papal sermon was delivered for the purpose of telling them that they should not revolt against the Fascist regime and should refrain from ‘civil disobedience.’” The Vatican supported fascism to the bitter end.
If these were the forces that sustained reaction in the past, by what logic could they be depended upon to oppose it today and in the future? Only by the logic of liberalism, which inhabits a world of its own, feeding on past memories.
The lessons of Italy were repeated in all their essential features in Germany in 1933. The authors themselves do not fail to point out that the “big industrial firms, banks, shipping, and insurance companies, in Italy no less than in Germany, were, together with the army, responsible for the creation of the dictatorship.” In the Spanish Civil War, the “democracies” played essentially the same role as in the case of Italy and Germany; while the Pope reserved his highest praise of Mussolini for the occasion of the latter’s entry – jointly with Hitler – into the Spanish “crusade.” Franco, the butcher, had and still has the full support of the Vatican.
To know all this, to say it, and to prove it, as the authors do, is to demonstrate that the Allies are counter-revolutionary, that they tend not toward “democracy” but to blackest reaction and dictatorship. But Salvemini and LaPiana conclude just the opposite. They see the hope of mankind in Churchill and Roosevelt, their “high principles” and their war aims.
 
Allied Policy
Yet the ideas of liberalism enter into sharpest conflict with reality precisely when it comes to the actual and not pretended policies and war aims of Washington and London. The course of the war has already demonstrated with crushing force that the “democracies” – not to mention the Vatican – have not altered their peacetime conduct in any significant way.
Salvemini and LaPiana do not hide their genuine alarm in citing the Darlan-Giraud deal and the advances to Otto Hapsburg, the Austrian pretender. They analyze in detail the negotiations and close collaboration between the Allies and the Vatican; they warn about the implications of the campaign to whitewash the Italian monarchy, etc., etc.
In their book, which was completed before the downfall of Mussolini, the authors say:
“As far as the American public can judge from what has leaked out about the plans being secretly and discreetly concocted in high circles, our diplomats in Washington are determined to supplant Mussolini with an Italian Darlan or Petain ... If such a plan is carried out, the Savoy monarchy will remain as a guarantee against any radical revolution. A coalition of former leaders, the big business men and clericals supported by the Vatican, would take up the government of the country under the protection of the American and English armies of occupation. Some of the extreme fascist laws would ‘be abolished, some concessions would be made to save the face of the democracies, and the new regime would, to all appearances, be hailed as a fulfillment of the terms of the Atlantic Charter ...”
Ironically enough, the publishers released the book the same week that the Badoglio government surrendered to the Allies. Since that time, events have completely verified the above-cited analysis of the authors, much to their own dismay no doubt. Nevertheless, Salvemini and LaPiana remain staunch supporters of the Allies and their war. The most rational explanation they have to offer for the conduct of Roosevelt and Churchill reads as follows:
“The lot of gangsters has become a comfortable one throughout the world, thanks to the fear of revolution which blinds the leaders of the liberty-loving peoples.” (Page 15)
Unable to face reality, Salvemini and LaPiana who suffer from a self-inflicted blindness impute their own affliction to Churchill and Roosevelt who proceed with open eyes from the knowledge that it is impossible really to stabilize capitalism in Europe and to avert the socialist revolution on the old “democratic” basis.
Salvemini and LaPiana fumble in the dark because they hold on to the ideas of liberalism which life itself has long ago discarded; and which can and do serve nowadays only as the most convenient cover for reaction. Old Labriola, one of their greatest countrymen, taught a lesson which they have never bothered to learn: “Ideas do not fall from heaven.”
No one has sucked the ideas of liberalism out of his thumb. Nor are they something good for all times and under all conditions. These ideas arose in the course of the class struggle. They have their class roots in the bourgeoisie. They played a great and progressive role in the struggle of the rising bourgeoisie against feudalism. When capitalism was young and vigorous the “logical form of bourgeois domination was the democratic republic.” (Engels) But capitalism has long since passed this heyday when democracy could and did serve as sheet-anchor for the whole bourgeois and even feudal regime; when everything which used to be reactionary could behave as democratic.
But there is another “logical form” just as inherent in capitalism: that of dictatorship. This form manifested itself progressively in the case of England (Cromwell) and France (Napoleon Bonaparte). As capitalism developed the trend to dictatorship tended more and more to manifest itself in a reactionary way. France relearned the lesson that the logical form of bourgeois domination is also the dictatorship under Napoleon the Little while Germany learned it under Bismarck. So long as capitalism remained in its ascendancy democracy and dictatorship could alternate and combine in many peculiar and transitional ways. But with the entry of capitalism into its highest and final stage the logical form of bourgeois domination is and can be only the dictatorship (Italy, 1921; Germany, 1933; Spain, 1938). This same historical process found still another expression in the rise of a new and higher democracy with its class roots in the proletariat. This democracy was established by the Russian Bolsheviks under Lenin and Trotsky in October 1917, in Russia. The regression of proletarian democracy into Stalinist totalitarianism is purely episodic; the regression of outlived capitalist democracy is chronic.
In May 1929, Leon Trotsky explained this historical process, as follows:
“We cannot measure our epoch with the yardstick of the nineteenth century, which was par excellence the century of the extension of democracy. In many respects the twentieth century will be more differentiated from the nineteenth than the whole of modern history differs from that of the Middle Ages ... After the installation of revolutionary power in Russia and the check to revolutionary movements in a succession of other countries, we witnessed the establishment of fascist dictatorship in the whole of southern and eastern Europe. How are we to explain this dousing of the fires on the altars of democracy?
“It is sometimes said that in these cases it is a question of backward nations, or of those lacking maturity. This explanation happens to be just good enough in the case of Italy. But even in cases where the explanation is appropriate, it is not enlightening. In the nineteenth century it was considered a law that backward nations were climbing the steps of democracy. Then why does the twentieth century push them along the road of dictatorship? I think that the explanation emerges from the facts themselves. Democratic institutions show that they cannot support the pressure of contemporary conflicts which are at one time international, and at another domestic, and on the other occasions both international and domestic at one and the same time. Is this a good thing or an evil? At all events, it is a fact.
“By analogy with electro-technology, democracy may be defined as a system of interrupters and insulators against the too powerful currents of the national or social struggle. There is no epoch in human history so saturated with antagonisms as ours. A hypertension of the current makes itself more and more felt along various points of the European system. Under a too high tension, the ‘fuses’ of democracy – class and international animosities – ‘blow out.’ Hence the short circuits of dictatorship. Naturally the weakest ‘interrupters’ are the first to give way. But the force of domestic and world conflicts does not weaken; it grows. It is doubtful that it is destined to calm down, given that the process has so far taken hold only of the periphery of the capitalist world. Gout begins in the little finger of a hand or in the big toe, but once on the way it goes right to the heart.”
When history herself has rendered the ideas of liberalism impotent and illogical, the spokesmen of liberalism have no choice but to follow suit.
–

 G. Wright: Soviet Life In Wartime (October 1943)




Wright Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

John G. Wright
Soviet Life In Wartime
What the Moscow Press Reveals
(October 1943)
 The colossal power unleashed by the Soviet masses in their 28 months of life-and-death struggle against German imperialism have found their most spectacular expression in the unprecedented military feats of the Red Army. Crucial as they are, the achievements on the military arena represent only one aspect of the total war effort.
Leon Trotsky pointed out that
“... the so-called military ‘potential’ depends primarily upon the economic strength of the state. ... In times of peace, the measuring of the economic might between the two hostile social systems can be postponed—for a long time, although by no means forever—with the help of political devices, above all the monopoly of foreign trade. During a war the test is made directly upon the field of battle.”
Because of Stalin’s policies the economic strength of the Soviet Union has been submitted to this gravest test under the most adverse conditions. The first workers’ state in history created in one of the most backward countries of Europe with only 15 years of planned economy behind it—and, moreover, with these three Five-Year Plans carried out under the degenerate, wasteful and rapacious Stalinist bureaucracy—was pitted in single combat against Germany, the most advanced capitalist country in Europe, backed by the entire resources of a conquered continent.
These are overwhelming odds. Stalin, who long ago betrayed Bolshevism, staked everything on his alliance with London and Washington. What aid has this actually brought to the embattled Soviet masses? The Kremlin promised the Soviet soldiers, workers and peasants that they would get vital military assistance—a “second front.” More than two years have gone by, and despite the persistent pleas and whining of Stalin and his Browders, there has been no “second front.” Whatever London and Washington may decide to do in this connection in the next period—in order to serve their own interests and policies — cannot alter the fact that even from a purely military standpoint, Stalin’s foreign policy has brought the Soviet Union exactly zero.
But what about lend-lease? Let us hear what one of the most serious publications of the American bourgeoisie has to say on this subject. Leland Stowe in an article in the October issue of the quarterly Foreign Affairs writes:
“The American lend-lease and British supplies did not reach Soviet Russia in sufficient proportions to become a major factor in the crucial defensive fighting along the Don, in the northern Caucasus and at Stalingrad during the summer and early autumn of 1942. This flow became really important only about the time that the Russians had already demonstrated their bulldog grip on Stalingrad.”
Mr. Stowe is compelled to admit that the Red Army’s military record represents an “exclusively Soviet achievement.” In public the capitalist press of course loudly denies this. But among themselves these gentlemen prefer the truth.
Soviet industry and agriculture, that is, Soviet workers and peasants, have borne the full brunt of the struggle. Despite all the terrible handicaps, the Soviet Union, even under Stalin, has already demonstrated on the military arena the superiority of nationalized economy, over decaying capitalism just as it had previously demonstrated the superiority of socialist methods in times of peace by the unprecedented economic achievements under the three Five-Year Plans. Every thinking worker will ask himself: If the conquests of the socialist revolution can lead to such attainments in a backward country, then what heights can the workers of advanced countries in Europe and the United States reach?
Side by side with their remarkable record of achievement must be placed the terrible price that the Soviet masses have had to pay for the Stalinist leadership and policies. The official Moscow press is beginning to divulge the full impact of the war on the Soviet Union.
Civilian and military casualties number between 15 and 20 millions. Soviet economy is feeling the pinch of manpower despite its vast human reserves. Youth and women comprise the bulk of the industrial personnel.
Here is a typical editorial comment in Pravda that discloses the true picture:
“Our economy has proved capable of preparing in a short period of time labor cadres to replace those called to the front. Some 1,400,000 new workers from the trade schools and the FZO (factory and stop schools) alone have streamed into Industry and transport during the war period. In addition, women by the hundreds of thousands — the wives and sisters of front line fighters—have entered the factories.” (Pravda, July 8.)    
The New Cadres in Industry The FZO and the “trade schools” supply Soviet industry with girls and boys from ten to seventeen years of age, and even younger. It should be recalled that child labor was introduced by the Kremlin in October 1940, that is, eight months prior to Hitler’s invasion; and in this brief period almost a million youngsters were already integrated in industry. The number of children and adolescents now employed, according to Stalin’s own figures, must be in the neighborhood of three million.
The proportion of women in industry is a jealously guarded secret. But it is possible to arrive at an estimate.
Pravda constantly refers to new hundreds of thousands of women workers. Special drives are conducted to speed the influx of women into industry. The press regularly features the achievements of women workers. The International Women’s Day is one of the few traditional socialist holidays still celebrated with great pomp. During the celebrations this year, Pravda stated editorially:
“The women back of the lines have shown themselves to be self-sacrificing patriots. All the strength of our womanhood, their abilities, their knowledge, their experience and time are wholly at the disposal of their native state. The working woman and peasant woman accept the government’s assignments as an iron law. But they strive to raise the productivity of labor and to work more efficiently. They take upon themselves additional obligations.” (Pravda, March 6.)
Seven years ago, in 1936, there were almost 3,500,000 women in heavy industry, metal and machine plants, construction and mines; and another million in light industry. It may be assumed that there is at least double that number now.   
The New Cadres in Agriculture The dominant role of women and children is even more marked in agriculture. Pravda flatly states:
“The youth has truly become the decisive force in the collective farm production. Youths and girls, adolescents are now working as tillers and tractor operators; they tend cattle, raise grain, vegetables and technical crops. An important section of the youth is in charge of special squads, brigades and cattle breeding farms.” (Pravda, January 20.)
One of the major activities of the bureaucracy this year has been to reconstitute the Komsomol (Russian Young Communist League) in the villages in order to give the necessary direction to agriculture. The Komsomol organization, reorganized so many times in the past, must be rebuilt from scratch. Here is a picture of its present condition:
“In the Rokhatinsk district of the Tadjik Soviet Socialist Republic there are 52 primary Komsomol organizations, but more than half of them exist only on paper. Meetings of the Komsomol take place only sporadically. In 10 collective farm organizations there were no meetings at all last year. Many members of the Komsomol have lost all touch with the organization.” (Pravda, January 20.)
For the first time in years local and district-wide meetings activists of the Komsomol are being held. They are attended by prominent functionaries. Kalinin, the President of the Soviet Union, was assigned to speak at a meeting of the Moscow Komsomol. (Pravda, February 14.)
Benediktov, the People’s Commissar of Agriculture, made a tour of individual collective farms, addressing the meetings of the Komsomol. At one of these meetings in the Tambov region he said:
“The major part of the field work is being done today, in the time of war, by the young boy and girl collective farmers.” (Pravda, July 8.)
The report of the attendance at this meeting gives a cross-section of the forces now available in agriculture.
“To the meeting of the Komsomol of the ‘Svetly Put’ kolkhoz in the Tambov district there came the boys and girls of the entire village; there came kolkhoz  women and the aged folk.” (Idem.)
The Tambov district is one of the rich farming areas, back of the front lines. It goes without saying that a model collective farm was selected for a meeting with such a high dignitary as the People’s Commissar of Agriculture. The local bureaucrats, it is no less obvious, must have done their utmost to get the largest possible attendance. Yet the only adults present were women and the aged. By and large, this attendance faithfully reproduces the war-time population of this particular village, and of the other villages throughout the country.   
Conditions in Agriculture Of all the sectors of Soviet economic life, agriculture has suffered the most and is under the gravest strain. Hundreds of thousands of square miles of the richest agricultural areas have been turned into wasteland. Pravda speaks of the reoccupied territories as “desert land.”
The functioning kolkhozi (collective farms) and the sov khozi (state farms) suffer from acute labor shortage, scarcity of machinery, replacement parts and fuel. The lack of horses has compelled the utilization of cows for field work and transportation.
To the needs of the civilian population and the army is now added the terrible plight of the population in the vast territory recaptured from the Germans. Since last winter the Red Army has recaptured an area four times as great as Germany. Tens of millions of civilians still remain in this “desert land.”
Among the emergency measures initially adopted by the Kremlin were voluntary donations of cattle, pigs, poultry, grain, etc., by collective farms in the rear to those in the devastated areas. For many months the Kremlin conducted a nation-wide campaign to spread this movement, ostensibly launched by the collectives themselves but actually initiated from the top.
This campaign touted by Pravda in June as embracing “millions of male and female collective farmers” proved a failure. The results were pitifully inadequate. The original plan of the Kremlin doubtless envisaged contributions of cattle, seed, etc., from the private possessions of the peasants. The press laid stress on personal “donations.” But the bulk of the actual stock obtained under administrative pressure came from the property of the collectives and state farms, and thus tended to weaken them still further.
Sharper measures were then applied. Amidst great fanfare the Kremlin suddenly announced on August 22 a “state plan for reconstruction of the Nazi-occupied areas as fast as they are liberated.” Every paper in Moscow featured it to the exclusion of all other news. The full text is not yet available, but the cables make the salient features of the plan quite clear. Restoration of agriculture is the burning problem. By October 15, “200,000 cattle, 350,000 sheep and goats, and 55,000 horses” will be supplied to the liberated areas in the north and the south. (New York Times, August 23.)
In the decree these herds are referred to as “evacuated cattle” which are being returned to their original collective farms. The assignment of quotas to various districts, however, clearly indicates that this is another administrative measure. The quotas cannot be fulfilled without levies on the private stocks of the peasants. And this may lead to dangerous consequences.
The individualistic tendencies within the collectives have been enormously speeded up by the war. The food scarcity and the currency inflation have resulted in a hot-house growth of “millionaire” peasants side by side with the “millionaire” kolkhozi. The huge sums donated and invested in loan drives by individual peasants in all parts of the country are eloquent proof of the resurgence of the “kulak” on the Soviet scene. A clash between the regime and these individualistic tendencies is unavoidable. Signs of it are already discernible.    
The Kulak Danger Editorial after editorial in Pravda warns against individual collective farmers who are “not averse to shirk,” who “evade their obligations” to the collectives, etc. In other words, there are peasants who spend most of their time on their own private strips, who sell on the free market, and hoard grain.
Deliveries of grain to the state are permitted to lag, and often are not fulfilled. Benediktov, the People’s Commissar of Agriculture, warned that the “fighting task” of the Komsomol is to create “militant brigades for the shipment of state grain deliveries.” (Pravda, July 8.)
In a single district, chairmen of 111 collectives were removed; in another, 30. (Pravda, June 28.)
In the reports of plenary sessions of party district and county committees throughout the USSR, there is a constant harping on the failure of this or that region to fulfill its sowing program, or the harvest, or repairs of tractors and combines.
At the Plenum of the Ryazan County Committee, “the work of the leaders of party organizations in Novo Derevensk, Sapozhkonsk, Ukholovsk, Pronsk, Trubechinsk and a number of other regions was severely criticized” for failures in the sowing program. At the Plenum of the Kirov County Committee, “the leaders of Molovsk, Urzhumsk, Sovetsk and Lebyazhsk regions” were criticized for similar failures. (Pravda, June 28.) In a period of a single week in June Pravda listed more than 50 badly lagging areas.
Pravda of course omits to mention that involved here is more than the customary inefficiency and failure of the leadership. The leaders of the various districts are none other than the “millionaire” kolkhozniki.
The most recent moves of the Kremlin—especially the attempt to lean on the youth and the administrative measures to solve the crisis in agriculture—are unmistakable signs of the sharpening of the class struggle in the village. They are grave signals of a growing internal danger.    
Soviet Workers in Wartime One great advantage over the past lies in the fact that the Soviet youth in the village has rallied en masse to the defense of the remaining conquests of the October revolution.
The Soviet workers, especially the youth, are performing miracles of industrial production. The Red Army is kept supplied with all the necessary technical equipment despite the grave losses of industrial plants and raw materials suffered in 1941 and 1942.
For the mass of the workers the food rations are at bare subsistence levels. Housing conditions, very bad before the war, have not improved. Production of civilian goods is almost at a standstill. The little that is produced comes primarily from handicrafts.
Conditions are worst in places like Leningrad and other cities where the needs of the population can be supplied only from local sources. But the Stalinist bureaucracy is now boasting that in July the entire city of Leningrad was served by “346 sewing shops, shoe shops, locksmith and other enterprises” which play “a big role in supplying the inhabitants of Leningrad with mass consumption goods.” (Izvestya, July 2.)
The greatest “successes” have been attained in the production of children’s wear.
“In five months of this year there have been already produced (in Leningrad) 11,400 pairs of children’s shoes, 10,800 overcoats, 7,900 dresses and more than 5,000 warm sweaters.”
It is impossible to purchase even second-hand articles of necessity.
“All sales involve barter: for example, for three pairs of old shoes a new (repaired) pair is issued, and so on.” (Izvestya, July 2.)
Although greatly reduced by the casualties during the siege, the population of Leningrad is now about a million and a half souls.
Such are the conditions under which the Soviet workers have maintained their morale. They are evincing more and more initiative. Their self-confidence has been greatly raised by their own unprecedented achievements and the successes of the Red Army. There are signs that they are exerting an increasing pressure on the bureaucracy. Reflecting this pressure, Izvestya writes:
“is it after all necessary to cite proof that the Soviet people, working in the rear, are consumed with a desire to give all their strength and all their knowledge in order to increase the aid to the front lines? They are concerned by the fate of their native enterprises, they constantly think and worry about them. To listen to their voices, to their opinions, and capably to utilize their fountains of initiative—that is the direct duty of every director in every enterprise”. (Izvestya, July 4.)
Not so very long ago, Stalin’s press used to blame the workers for any drop in production. Now the blame is placed on the local bureaucrats.   
Pravda Changes Its Tune If the production of the Kalinin coal mine in the Molotovsk district has dropped from a peacetime level of 3,000 tons a day to 2,000 tons in 1941 and to 1,574 tons in June 1943, it is the leadership that is wholly to blame. (Pravda, June 28.) But why has this leadership been permitted to undermine production for the entire period of the war? On that score there is silence. The bureaucrats continue their arbitrary rule, immune from the control of the rank and file. The sole remedy remains the lash from the top.
The mines in the Kuzbas, the largest available source of supply, have been lagging badly in coke production, and have thereby disrupted the output of iron and steel.
“The Plenum of the (Kemerovo) County Committee of the party has found unsatisfactory the functioning of the trusts and combines of the Kuzbas in the first six months of the current year. The Plenum has underscored that the City Committees of Prokpiev, Anzhero-Sudzhensk, Leninsk-Kuznetsk, Osstnikov, Stalinsk and Kisselev have failed to assure the elimination of those inadequacies which were pointed out in the motion of the Central Committee of the CPSU concerning the work of the party organizations in the Kuzbas.” (Pravda, July 8.)
Moscow papers of late have resumed featuring articles against bureaucrats and bureaucratic practices. The same gentlemen who have just assumed the prerogatives of a military caste, with all its trappings, gold braid uniforms, special officers’ clubs, orderlies, etc., are now pointing an accusing finger at “directors-aristocrats.”
Party functionaries are under fire for having isolated themselves from the masses. Even in distant Bashkiria, plenums of the highest party bodies pass resolutions condemning longstanding bureaucratic practices.
“Certain party organizations ignore such important forms of education as the calling of meetings of party activists ... The reporter (Secretary Ignatiev of the Bashkir County Committee) called attention to the extremely rare appearances of and political reports from the secretaries of county, regional and city committees of the party, the chairmen of executive committees and of regional Soviets and the leaders of industry. Many Soviet, trade union and cooperative activists have stopped making reports to their respective electorates.” (Pravda, June 28.)
The Kremlin is resuming the old game of unloading its own crimes on its underlings. In the very midst of the greatest victories, the need of scapegoats suddenly becomes acute!   
Stalin’s New “Turn” Above all, Stalin now needs scapegoats on whom to unload the entire responsibility for the working and living conditions of the Soviet masses. A major campaign against the lower-ranking civilian bureaucrats has been in progress for months. In a leading editorial War and the Care of the Toilers’ Living Needs, Pravda  hypocritically laments:
“Unfortunately not all local leaders everywhere have become imbued with the consciousness of the fact that it is their daily duty to be concerned about the living needs of the toilers in the rear.”
And then it is stated:
“The government and the party demand a genuine, broad and decisive turn by the local organizations to .provide all-sided services with regard to the living needs of the workers in the rear.” (Pravda, June 18.)
Why was it necessary to wait almost two years before demanding this “turn”? How is it possible for the local organizations to disregard with impunity the elementary needs of the masses? By its belated and hysterical demands, the Kremlin gives the clearest possible expression to the irreconcilable contradiction between its regime and the living needs of the whole country.
Special meetings of the party membership in Moscow are now being held regularly. At one of them a resolution was passed “binding the leadership to give day-to-day care to the living conditions and needs of the toilers.” (Pravda, June 4.) The Twelfth Session of the Moscow City Soviet—another suddenly revived institution—sent a letter to Stalin, informing him that:
“You personally Comrade Stalin are worrying tirelessly about Moscow and your concern and attention inspire all Muscovites to new labor feats. Your constant concern about the needs of the Soviet people obliges us to improve manyfold all our work in satisfying the living needs of the population.” (Pravda, June 26.)
Not only the government and the party but Marshal Stalin himself is demanding a “genuine turn.”
Shocking cases of negligence are being publicly aired.
In the city of Kirov “communal living quarters of the textile workers are without lights, the rooms are dirty and uncomfortable ... The apartment houses attached to the factory have empty rooms; one half of the living area is occupied by individuals not connected with the industry. Meanwhile a portion of the workers lives in barracks unequipped for human habitation ... The factory is not fulfilling the plan.” (Pravda, June 7.) In Chelyabinsk 700 workers are quartered in a former schoolhouse with no facilities for cooking or heating water. “Many cots are without mattresses. Only half of the rooms are supplied with sheets and pillow cases, and these, too, are black with dirt.” (Pravda, June 18.) Again,
“The city baths work irregularly. There used to be cold water but no hot water; now there is hot water but for the last few days no cold water.”
Pravda is indignant that street cars fail to operate regularly and then the workers are blamed for  coming late. (Pravda,  June 18.)
All this is from an article entitled Damning Facts. Among the facts cited is the following:
“Let us walk into the dining room of a leather factory. Here the workers are compelled to stand in line 30 to 40 minutes. The dining room is supposed to serve 400, but only 6 plates and 2 teaspoons are provided. The dining room has all-told 8 small tables. The kitchen does not contain a single undamaged utensil; food is prepared in pots full of holes which are plugged up with rags ... The director of the factory, Andreyev, remains calm and imperturbable. He and the secretary of the party organization are not at all upset by these abominations.”
The article concludes as follows:
“The adduced facts show that among certain local organizations there is no sign of a genuine Bolshevik concern for the needs of the masses.”
The campaign is nation-wide. The editors of Magnitogorsk Metal in the distant Urals evinced exemplary initiative. They organized “a raid of worker correspondents to check on the functioning of factory dining rooms. Not a few facts of poor service rendered to the workers were disclosed; many valuable suggestions for improving community food-service were made.” But the factory organizations paid no attention. Pravda commended the Magnitogorsk editors for their “raid” and warned the factory administration to correct its attitude toward “the signals in the press.” (Pravda, June 27.)
But just what steps are actually taken to remedy the situation? Let us see what the approved procedure is.   
Stalinist Remedies On May 30 Pravda carried a criticism of “party and trade union leaders and managers of N—— factory for a bureaucratic attitude toward cultural-living conditions of working men and women. This enterprise fails systematically to fulfill the plan.”
On June 28 Pravda was able proudly to report that the bureau of the city committee having jurisdiction over N—— factory took up all these criticisms and found them to be correct.
“The Bureau of the City Committee took note that the party bureau of the factory and its secretary, Comrade Berezin, failed to organize properly the party political work at the factory and did not fully utilize the party’s rights of control over the functioning of the administration. The factory trade union committee and its chairman, Comrade Semeikin, took a formal-bureaucratic attitude toward such a native cause as the satisfaction of the cultural and living requirements of workers and employees.”
All the individuals and organizations involved got a censure. Only Semeikin, chairman of the trade union committee and the lowest ranking bureaucrat, was removed from his post.
Not a word was mentioned about any improvement in the conditions at the factory, or of steps contemplated to that end. One scapegoat was apparently enough in the way of showing a correct attitude toward “signals in the press.”
More than a month after the Moscow membership meeting that passed a resolution on the need of “caring for the workers,” the highest Moscow party committees met in a plenary session. A great deal of criticism was voiced. Especially reprehensible was found to be the work of the housing committees in preparing for the coming winter. “Especially poor is the work of repairing roofs and providing central heating for buildings.” The gathering solemnly affirmed that “individual industrial, party, Soviet and trade union organizations have not taken all the necessary measures for improving the living conditions of the toilers and have failed to evince enough initiative in mobilizing local resources as a result of which biggest inadequacies obtain in rendering service to the living needs of the population.” (Pravda, July 14.) This apparently likewise suffices at the present time as a proper response to “signals in the press.” The groundwork for future scapegoats has in any case been prepared.
The bureaucracy continues to operate in time of war just as it did in the period of peace. Will this satisfy the Soviet workers? Pravda itself hardly thinks so. Recurring more and more frequently in its columns is the old admonition: “There is an increasing need for raising our political vigilance.” In the past this has always served as a signal for wholesale purges.



It is of course far too early to draw the final balance sheet of the Soviet-Nazi war which has entered its eighth month. Nevertheless it is possible to make several important preliminary estimates especially in the vital sphere of the country’s economy.
What is happening to the achievements of the three Five Year Plans which the Stalinists used to palm off day in and day out in peacetime as “the irrevocable triumph of socialism”?
An important sector of the conquests of construction, industrialization and collectivization has either been reduced to smoldering ruins or remains under Nazi control. This is a sad fact, but true.
 
Soviet Losses
During the first five months of the war the Soviet Union lost almost 600,000 square miles of her most densely populated and most productive territories. The Kremlin has recently admitted that the German offensive had rolled to within 10 miles of Moscow itself. The Tula province together with the city of Tula, one of the key armament producing centers, had likewise suffered attack and had even fallen into German hands. This means the heart of European Russia has been ravaged by the war. The Nazis still hold the greater part of the Ukraine, Byelo-Russia and Crimea.
The “scorched earth” policy dictated by the circumstances of the struggle could naturally only add to the havoc of war. The Germans in retreating have supplemented the devastation by measures of their own. It can be said without any fear of exaggeration that the scope of the destruction on the battlefields of Russia is without precedent in history.
 
The Stalinist Lie
Prior to Soviet victories, the Stalinists dared not deny this. For example, last October William Z. Foster in his pamphlet The Soviet Union wrote,
“Let us remember Stalin’s warning that the Soviet Union faces a ‘grave danger.’ Hitler has overrun a large section of the USSR, he has ruined a considerable percentage of Soviet industry, and has caused heavy casualties in the Soviet’s armed forces.”
Meanwhile the Kremlin has been crawling out of its skin to minimize the terrible losses incurred under its leadership. Emboldened by the recent successes of the Red Army, Moscow has begun circulating the incredible claim that not a single basic industry has been lost to the Nazis. Not even so much as a single large-scale factory!
In a speech delivered by one Scherbakov in Moscow on the occasion of the eighteenth anniversary of Lenin’s death it is stated flatly:
“Even in districts which the Germans succeeded in temporarily occupying THEY FOUND NO LARGE SCALE FACTORIES BUT ALL THE BASIC INDUSTRIES IN THESE AREAS WERE EVACUATED IN GOOD TIME DEEP BEHIND THE LINES. Established in new cities they are operating successfully, providing the front with an increasing amount of output” (Daily Worker, Jan. 27, 1942).
Colonel T., a military expert in Stalin’s employ, tries to dismiss the losses brazenly as follows:
“The Germans got little except a lot of guerrilla-infested land to police. Much of what could be destroyed was destroyed. All that could be moved east was moved” (New Masses, Feb. 3, 1942, p.14).
Colonel T. no doubt wrote his article before Scherbakov made his speech. In the next issue of the New Masses the editors will be in position to correct the Colonel and to pass on this official report of Scherbakov to the effect that in the space of five months, while the enemy was advancing along a 2,000 mile front and penetrating 600 to 700 miles into the heart of the country, the Kremlin not only moved “all that could be moved” but evacuated “all the basic industries,” and in addition had them “operating successfully” deep in the interior.
 
The Bitter Truth
What did the Nazis get? “A lot of guerrilla-infested land.” What did the Soviet economy lose? To give an inkling of the losses, we cite another authority whose book is still being widely circulated by the Stalinists.
“Hitler covets the Ukraine,” wrote the Very Reverend Hewlett Johnson. “And understandably so. The land is surpassingly rich. The Ukraine is a granary to the Soviet Union, producing more than a fifth of the Soviet wheat, a third of Soviet barley, a quarter of Soviet maize, and nearly three-quarters of Soviet sugar-beet.... Not wheat alone attracted Hitler. He coveted the coal of the Donetz basin, 66,000 million tons of it; and the iron ore at Krivoi Rog, 800 million tons; the mercury at Nikatovka, the lead-zinc ores and gold, and the phosphorites and labradorites, marbles and dolomites” (Hewlett Johnson, The Soviet Power, p.260).
To this enormous natural wealth must be added the vast industrial plants, the power stations, the mines and railways, the ship-building industries and other technological equipment representing investments of hundreds of billions of rubles and almost two decades of untold sacrifice and toil. In terms of production, the losses in the occupied areas range from 30 to 50 per cent, and even more of the total Soviet output in the following branches of industry: electric power, all kinds of machinery (tractors, locomotives, railway cars, tanks, engines, planes, etc.), chemicals and dyes, salt mines, aluminum, coal, iron, steel, rolled steel, armored plate, manganese, etc., etc.
For years the Kremlin used to point precisely to the territories lost to the Nazis as the irrefutable proof of the building of “socialism in one country.” Today, they pretend that nothing substantial has really been lost. People who swallow this Stalinist lie should have no difficulty at all in accepting the less fantastic but no less fictitious reports from Moscow concerning the rehabilitation of the areas reoccupied by the Red Army.
Two weeks after the liberation of the Kerch peninsula in Crimea, the Kremlin announced:
“The Kerch port... was nothing but a heap of ruins.... Not one building or installation survived ... The electric plants have resumed operation, the tramline functions, regular studies have been resumed, all the shops, flour mills, bakeries, etc., are open. Kerch industry is coming back to normal.” (Daily Worker, Jan. 22, 1942)
Similar claims concerning other regions have been adduced to any number.
 
Grave Labor Shortage
At the same time, the Kremlin has to acknowledge an acute labor shortage. This is understandable. Even prior to the outbreak of hostilities, Soviet industry suffered so acutely from lack of manpower that Stalin by ukase introduced child labor. The loss of almost 70,000,000 inhabitants in the Nazi-occupied territories, the demands of the front, the enormous casualties suffered, have monstrously sharpened this already aggravated condition.
A Kuibyshev dispatch dealing with the conditions in the reoccupied territories reported that “most of the work is performed by women since practically all the men are fighting with the Red Army or guerrilla detachments” (Daily Worker, Jan. 20, 1942).
One week after the outbreak of the war, Pravda stated officially that “more than 11,000,000 women are working in enterprises and offices, and more than 19,000,000 are working in collective farm fields” (Pravda, June 29, 1941).
Scherbakov, in the speech that we have already cited, devoted special attention to the role of women:
“Special note should be made of the part played in the struggle against the enemy by Soviet women patriots. Many women have today entered industry and many thousands have mastered new professions and are successfully replacing the men serving the colors. Thousands and thousands of village girls have become tractor drivers and harvest combine operators.” (Daily Worker, Jan. 27, 1942)
 
The Stalinist Solution
But this mobilization of women into industry and agriculture has far from solved the labor shortage. In July, 1941, i. e., the first month of the war, it was decided to employ child labor below the age of fourteen. With its habitual hypocrisy, Moscow has tried to represent this move as having originated spontaneously with the school children themselves.
“Collective farm children have started a movement for children to work on state and collective farms. They have been joined by tens of thousands of city children, including those who have been evacuated from cities.” (Daily Worker, July 20, 1941)
These “tens of thousands” of children worked in harvesting last year’s crops and a far broader mobilization is scheduled for the current year. Eric McLoughlin, correspondent of The Sydney Morning Herald was permitted to report this in a censored dispatch form Kuibyshev.
“School children,” he wrote, “participated in the harvest just completed .... Worked out jointly by educational authorities and officials of the Agricultural Commissariat, the scheme envisages ... practical training weekly for every child of school age. The younger children will be taught the cultivation of vegetable, berry and fruit plots. Boys and girls of 12 to 14 will learn how to handle tools and care for stock while youths from 14 up ... will undergo a course of tractor and combine operation” (NY Times, Jan. 7, 1942).
To spur the children in the performance of these adult tasks, they will be paid the same wage as adults.
“When the children,” reported McLoughlin, “start work – probably when the Spring sowing begins – they will be paid on the same basis as other agricultural labor.” (idem)
If we leave all other considerations aside, the question still remains: Can children successfully operate modern, large-scale, mechanized farming? To ask this question is to answer it. The measure is clearly one of desperation.
But to believe the Stalinists, children are capable of operating not only modern agriculture but also modern industry. Great successes are being claimed by Moscow in the employment of kids of fourteen and over in industry. They were drafted into “labor schools” in October 1940 and it is now announced “have become component parts of the national war effort” (Daily Worker, Jan. 24, 1942). The same report declares that many of them “are now real Stakhanovites at their jobs.” The Russian press is tireless in reporting overfulfilments of norms by 200 per cent, 300 per cent, etc., by school children. These claims testify not to the fact that children are capable of running large-scale plants but on the contrary to the fact that the productivity of labor remains on such low levels in the USSR that even children can in certain exceptional instances match and surpass the norms for adults.
 
The Low Productivity of Labor
The Achilles heel of Soviet industry is its low productivity of labor. Despite the most modern equipment, it takes two, three and in many cases even ten Soviet workers to attain the output of a single individual in the advanced capitalist countries. This is what renders the problem of labor force so acute.
The greatest obstacle in the struggle to raise the productivity of labor was and remains the bureaucracy and the regime it imposes on Soviet society in general and Soviet economy in particular. Years ago, Leon Trotsky pointed out:
“Any hundred Soviet workers transferred into the conditions, let us say, of American industry, after a few months, and even weeks, would probably not fall behind the American workers of a corresponding category. The difficulty lies in the general organization of labor. The Soviet administrative personnel is, as a general rule, far less equal to the new productive tasks than the worker.”
It is unquestionable that the Soviet workers are straining all their energies to provide the necessary armaments. They are not sparing themselves and have accepted the prolongation of working hours without any complaints. But as against this there remain the inefficiency, ineptness, arbitrariness of the administrative staff. The Pravda itself has been compelled to admit that vital defense orders have been sidetracked by factory directors merely out of personal considerations.
A change in the regime is an indispensable condition for raising the production of Soviet industry. The further conduct of the war depends upon an enormous expansion in production. Under the most favorable conditions, child labor can play merely the role of an auxiliary force. Instead of raising the productivity of labor the attempt to introduce children into industry as a “component part of the national war effort” can only result in lowering it still further.
 
The Stalinist “Increase”
“In order to achieve complete victory,” said Scherbakov, “we shall have to double and triple our efforts.” One can readily agree with this estimate that the output of industry must be doubled, trebled and even quadrupled in the immediate period ahead. But what has been actually accomplished in the eight months of the war effort? Amid great fanfare the Kremlin has just announced that Soviet production in January 1942 had increased 40 per cent over the total for... June 1940! By next spring, this increase, it is predicted “will have jumped to 60 per cent.” The Reuters dispatch which broadcasts this news contains the following comment: “There are no ifs or buts about this figure. It is the total Russian production, not just a local increase for the Urals” (NY Times, Feb. 2, 1942).
Let us analyze this report a bit more closely. We begin by taking the Stalinist “statistics” at their face value. The 40 per cent increase is still far below the levels of production which are officially acknowledged as indispensable. Doubling and trebling production, in terms of percentages, means increases of 100 and 200 per cent. In other words, Soviet industry is now operating from 60 to 160 per cent below the necessary levels. At the reported rate of increase these levels (doubled and trebled output) will not be achieved in 1942 in time, either for the envisaged German offensive in the spring or the military activities in the summer and autumn of this year. Translated into ordinary language this signifies that the Kremlin itself has no hopes of attaining “complete victory” in 1942.
But what is the real meaning of an increase of 40 per cent over the output of June 1940? As we shall see* it really denotes a grave condition of Soviet industry.
In June 1940 and throughout the subsequent months up to June 22, 1941, the Soviet industry was operating under the Third Five Year Plan. Most of the plants were not at the time producing armaments as they are today. Since the outbreak of hostilities the greater part of industry has been – or should have been – switched over to war production. Because of the centralized character of Soviet economy this switch from planned production in peacetime to all-out war production can be and should have been achieved far more quickly and efficiently than in any capitalist country. Yet in eight months time, despite this shift in production, the Kremlin cannot claim more than a 40 per cent increase in armaments.
But that is not all. How was Soviet industry operating in June 1940? The answer to this question exposes the typical Stalinist fraud in manipulating statistics. In June 1940, Soviet production had declined to catastrophic levels. At the Eighteenth Party Conference in February 1941 it was officially revealed that Soviet plants had been operating at two-
thirds, one-half of their capacity, and even lower. As a matter of fact, the keynote of Malenko’s report at this conference was: “The impermissible utilization of the productive capacities of our enterprises” (Pravda, Feb. 16, 1941). (For a detailed analysis of the situation I refer the reader to my article, How Stalin Cleared the Road for Hitler, in the November 1941 issue of the Fourth International.)
 
The Real Situation
What could a 100 per cent increase in January 1942 in output mean for a Soviet plant which operated in 1940, say, at 50 per cent of its capacity? It would mean that such a plant would still be operating today only at its normal peacetime capacity. At first sight this may appear inexplicable. Percentages can easily be manipulated to confuse people, and this, incidentally, is the reason why the Stalinists resort to them. But the matter is really very simple. A plant operating at one-half (or 50 per cent) of its capacity would have to double its output in order to attain full capacity (or 100 per cent). Now in terms of percentage such a doubled output would likewise read as an increase of 100 per cent. So that if the Kremlin had been able to report in 1942 that 100 per cent increase had been achieved over the 1940 output this particular plant would now be operating at its full capacity, while those plants which had been producing at less than one-half capacity (i.e. 40 per cent, 30 per cent, etc.) would still be operating below their full capacity, despite even a “100 per cent increase.” But the Kremlin itself does not dare report 100 per cent increase, not even over the 1940 output. And we may rest assured that they deliberately chose the month in the past which had the lowest production (June 1940) and the month since the outbreak of the war with the highest production (January 1942) in order to obtain the most imposing figure possible (40 per cent). So that the reported increase of 40 per cent over June 1940 production denotes that Soviet plants are still operating at far below their full capacity. Only a Kremlin bureaucrat could try to pass this off as an achievement.
The first workers’ state has already paid a staggering price in terms of disproportionate losses of manpower and economic resources during the eight months of isolated struggle it has been compelled to conduct under the leadership of the Stalinist bureaucracy.
Obviously, the Stalinist regime intends to pursue throughout the war the very same methods which disrupted Soviet economy in times of peace. But every difficulty, every contradiction in economic life finds today its repercussion on the military arena. Eight months of warfare have already placed a far greater strain on Soviet industry and agriculture than on those of any other major warring power. Greater strain lies ahead. The danger of an attack by Japan on the east is increased by the Japanese successes in the Pacific.
To be sure, because of its socialist foundations, the USSR can withstand far greater burdens than any of the most advanced capitalist countries. But this superiority is not at all absolute. Far from being inexhaustible the resources of the Soviet Union can be drained. Unless the Stalinist regime is removed in time and replaced by the resurgent Soviets of Workers’, Peasants’ and Soldiers’ Deputies, a protracted isolated struggle threatens complete economic collapse.



Twenty-five years ago the Russian workers, under the leadership of the Bolshevik Party of Lenin and Trotsky, carried through the first victorious proletarian revolution. This anniversary finds the Soviet Union in the gravest crisis of its entire existence. We Trotskyists remain what we have always been: the best defenders of the Soviet Union.
The victory of the Russian revolution, as Lenin said, opened up a new epoch in world history. For this new epoch in which we live the experience and lessons of the Russian revolution are still the decisive ones.
The Russian revolution, which resulted directly from the first imperialist world war, demonstrated irrefutably that in modern society there is only one class capable of solving all the burning social problems and of providing the program and leadership for the attainment of social progress. That class is the working class.
Marx and Engels, the founders of scientific socialism, were the first to discover, analyze and clarify the historic mission of the workers under capitalism. They did this in the middle of the nineteenth century, at a time when capitalism was still in its ascendancy. Under the leadership of Lenin and Trotsky, the Russian workers proved in action in 1917 that the scientific doctrine of Marxism was not a Utopia but the living reality.
Let us briefly review the unparalleled achievements of the Russian working class. They comprised a minority of the population in one of the most backward countries of Europe. But their numerical strength was not at all the true gauge of their internal powers and resources. They attained power. Upon establishing the workers’ rule in the territories of the former Czarist empire, they could not proceed immediately to the solution of socialist tasks as will the workers in the advanced capitalist countries like the United States, England, Germany. The Russian workers found themselves confronted with tasks far more complex. They, like the workers in all backward countries, had first to accomplish the tasks of the democratic revolution, above all the agrarian revolution. Historically, these tasks were those of another class, the capitalist class. But the belated Russian capitalists, like their counterparts in all other backward countries, were not only impotent to carry out these tasks but actually opposed their solution. To fulfill the democratic revolution it was necessary to overthrow both the Czarist autocracy and the Russian capitalists. This is precisely what the Russian workers did in an alliance with the peasants in October 1917.
They swept from the face of the earth the most reactionary government which had existed up to that time in Europe. They purged the country of all the rubbish of feudalism. They carried through the democratic revolution more completely than was ever done before. Had the Russian workers accomplished nothing more, this alone would have amply justified their revolution. However, as is well known, they did not stop with this.
The backward and predominantly rural economy of the former Czarist empire had been shattered during the years of Czarist participation in the first World War. During the eight months of the Provisional Government, there was a further decline. Russia was bankrupt. Upon this bankrupt country, German imperialism imposed the infamous peace of Brest-Litovsk. And over and above this, the combined forces of world reaction then imposed three years of civil war, the most bitter and destructive in modern times.
It was under these conditions and against such insuperable odds that the Russian workers proved the ability of workers not only to get power but to keep it.
In the very heat of struggle the Red Army was organized. This task was entrusted to Leon Trotsky, who remained Commissar of War throughout the civil war and for almost five years thereafter. The onslaught of the counter-revolution and of imperialist intervention was beaten back on 22 fronts.
There was nothing accidental about this epoch-making victory of the Soviet Union at its very birth. The lessons of the civil war apply with just as much force today as they did in 1918–21.
 
What Leninism Built and Stalinism Destroyed
The principal instrument of the Russian revolution was the Bolshevik Party. This party prepared and insured the October revolution. It created the Soviet state and safeguarded its. conquests. The Bolshevik Party was built by Lenin and his collaborators in more than thirty years of irreconcilable struggle. Stalin destroyed it completely in less than a decade. He murdered entire generations of Bolsheviks, the oldest as well as the youngest. During the infamous Moscow Frame-ups (1935–38) he killed all of Lenin’s closest collaborators – Zinoviev, Kamenev, Bukharin, Rykov, Serebryakov, I.N. Smirnov, Piatakov, Preobrazhensky and countless others. In the same purges and subsequent ones that were kept secret, he destroyed the next generation which had raised him to power. He ruthlessly crushed the youth. The Komsomols – the Russian YCL – were erased as a political organization in 1936. Even this “reorganized” Komsomol was purged and re-purged. As late as May 1940, over 70 per cent of the leaders of this organization were removed. The party and the youth have ceased to exist politically. They are now bureaucratic shells completely isolated from the masses. They are not even permitted to issue statements on the war. The burning and immediate task of the Soviet workers is to reconstitute their revolutionary party, and thus regain the indispensable instrument for the preservation of the workers’ state.
The Russian revolution revealed the Soviets – the Councils of Workers, Soldiers, Agricultural Laborers and Peasants – as the most natural, most efficient and most democratic form of government in the transition period between capitalism and socialism. Lenin hailed the Soviets as a million times more democratic than any bourgeois parliamentary republic. And this was true of the Soviets under Lenin and Trotsky. They played a central role in the civil war. Victory would have been impossible without them. They welded the alliance between the workers and peasants against all the exploiters. They assisted and facilitated the work of the Revolutionary Military Council. They mobilized the draftees; conducted a struggle against deserters, collected foodstuffs, raw materials, supplies. Above all, they developed the initiative and the creative abilities of the masses themselves. Stalin abolished the Soviets long ago. They were replaced by the fiction of the Stalinist “Constitution” and its equally fictitious “Supreme Council.” This handpicked body has not been summoned a single time since the outbreak of the war. Even its Presidium, of which Stalin is now chairman, has played no role whatever. The revival of the Soviets, and of workers’ democracy without which they are only a sham, remains essential for the successful defense of the USSR.
Lenin and Trotsky viewed the trade unions as a school of Communism and as one of the institutions through which the workers ruled in the factories and in the Soviets. Democracy in the trade unions was for the Bolsheviks an indispensable condition for the preservation and advancement of the workers’ state. The last time there was a convention of the Red Trade Unions was in 1932. The trade unions have become the same silent lifeless shells as the destroyed party, the suppressed Komsomols, the “Supreme Council of the Soviets,” not to mention the Third International and its “helmsman,” Dimitrov.
Victory was gained under Lenin and Trotsky because under their leadership the workers depended on their own program, their own strength, their own organizations. For lack of these they suffer defeats today. The responsibility for these defeats must be placed where it belongs, not on the workers but on the treacherous Stalinist leadership.
At the termination of the civil war, the Russian workers were for the first time free to turn their attention and efforts to the task of economic reconstruction. The country was in a catastrophic condition.
“Industrial production for 1921, immediately after the end of the civil war, amounted at most to one-fifth of the pre-war level. The production of steel fell from 4.2 million tons to 183 thousand tons – that is, to 1/23 of what it had been. The total harvest of grain decreased from 801 million hundredweight to 503 million in 1922. That was a year of terrible hunger. Foreign trade at the same time plunged from 2.9 billion rubles to 30 million. The collapse of the productive forces surpassed anything of the kind that history had ever witnessed.” (Leon Trotsky, The Revolution Betrayed, p. 22.)
The imperialist enemies of the workers’ state and their Menshevik flunkies were certain that the Bolsheviks could never emerge from the economic chaos, famine and ruin into which the combined forces of world reaction had plunged the country. To make things doubly sure, the imperialists maintained a blockade. The restoration of Soviet economy did indeed appear to be a hopeless task. The country’s economic life had to be rebuilt literally from the beginning in almost every sphere. But the Russian workers once again accomplished the seemingly impossible. In the space of a few years, despite the fact that the work of reconstruction had to be carried on in conditions of isolation from the world market, they brought production back to pre-war levels.
In making their revolution the Russian workers had banked – as they had every right to – upon the help of the workers in other countries, particularly of the advanced capitalist lands. They looked upon their revolution as the first stage of the world revolution that would free all countries from the yoke of imperialism and allow the development of productive forces on a world scale, through world cooperation and planning. This international socialist outlook is simply the political expression for the needs and realities of modern technique and industry, and therefore of all the peoples today. But the treachery of the parties of the Second International enabled the world bourgeoisie to emerge from the post-war crisis and to keep the Soviet Union isolated. The young parties of the newly found Communist International were as yet too weak and inexperienced to wrest power from the class enemy. This unexpected tardiness of the world revolution brought about a temporary stabilization between the young workers’ republic and the decaying system of imperialism. And this unstable correlation of forces in its turn laid the basis for the growth of political reaction inside and outside the Soviet Union.
From the Czarist empire, the Soviet working class had inherited along with backwardness an enormous bureaucracy. Considerable sections of these chinovniks (Czarist functionaries) were retained in the machinery of the newly founded state. At the same time, the conditions of backwardness and isolation provided a favorable milieu for the solidification and intrenchment of a new bureaucratic layer. These new formations merged with the old. The bureaucratization of the government led in its turn to the growth of the bureaucracy within the Bolshevik Party and finally resulted in its complete destruction by Stalin.
This rising Soviet bureaucracy, with its chieftain Stalin, bears the chief responsibility for the continued isolation of the Soviet Union and for the subsequent delay of the world revolution. Grown conservative, this bureaucracy brought about the defeat of the German workers in 1923 through its influence upon and control of the Third International. From 1923 on, Stalin and his flunkies began to lose confidence in the power of the world working class. The preservation of their own power and privileges became more and more their prime consideration. In the autumn of 1924, after Lenin’s death, Stalin promulgated the false and reactionary theory of “socialism in one country.”
The uncompromising internationalism of Lenin and Trotsky taught the workers that it was necessary to make “the greatest national sacrifices for the overthrow of international capitalism.” Under Stalin it became more and more the doctrine of the Third International to make the greatest international sacrifices for the sake of safeguarding the “irrevocable triumph of socialism” in the USSR. Stalinism led section after section of the world working class to defeats, each graver than the one preceding.
These defeats increased the isolation of the Soviet Union. At the same time they facilitated the intrenchment of Stalin’s personal dictatorship over the workers’ state.
But even under the reign of a monstrous, rapacious, inefficient, self-seeking and self-perpetuating bureaucracy, the Soviet working class was able to demonstrate to the world the superiority of the socialist methods of production. The bureaucracy sapped but failed to destroy the inner power and resources of the isolated proletariat. Under the Five Year Plans, Soviet industry and agriculture developed at unprecedented tempos. Entire new branches of industry were developed. The economic gains of the USSR are all the more significant since they were made in the period of the most profound and debilitating economic crisis in the history of world capitalism. The Soviet workers did not and could not build socialism as the criminals and misleaders in the Kremlin boasted. But they did prove once and for all that the abolition of capitalism assures the possibility of unprecedented economic progress even under the most adverse conditions imaginable, even in a backward country, even under conditions of isolation and under a leadership that mismanaged, wasted and devoured. Many of these conquests are now charred ruins. Many others are in the hands of the Nazis. But the significance of these successes can never be deleted from the annals of history or lost to mankind.
The economic successes of the Soviet Union point the road of salvation to our war-torn civilization. Decaying imperialism is now engaged in a work of destruction which threatens to throw mankind back to barbarism. Untold wealth has already been expended, and vaster amounts are scheduled for annihilation. Not only entire cities but enormous productive areas have been reduced to rubble and wasteland. Completely geared to their respective war machines, the productive forces of the most advanced countries are deteriorating more and more rapidly. Cold, hunger and disease hover over continents while millions die behind the lines or in the global battlefields.
Each additional month of warfare poses more and more imperiously before the peoples of all countries the question: How can we ever emerge from and repair the havoc of this war?
The prospects of an imperialist peace – which is itself being postponed by “democrats” and fascists alike to a more and more indefinite future – are no less fearsome than the present reality. In peace as in war, decaying capitalism has nothing to offer except greater oppression, degradation and suffering. Capitalism will, if permitted to emerge from this war, undertake the work of reconstruction, and this under conditions of post-war stagnation, depression, crises and armies of unemployed that will make the last economic convulsion of 1929-1939 seem like “good times.” Capitalist diplomats, if permitted, will arrange another peace which will be only a preparation for still another and vaster slaughter. But the experience of the Russian revolution has already pointed out the only road of salvation: Only socialist methods can make good the ravages of the Second World War, to say nothing of moving society forward.
If the Soviet workers, in a degenerated workers’ state, were able to achieve what they did, what will the German proletariat, under the regime of a genuine workers’ democracy, be able to accomplish with the resources of their country? Or the workers of England? Or of the United States? What will the Socialist United States of Europe do?
In the light of the Russian experience these are no longer questions of speculation or theory. They are today questions of fact. The masses of the world have nowhere to turn for guidance except to the Russian revolution. From it alone can they gather renewed hope and strength and courage.
The Stalinist bureaucracy has from the beginning tried to usurp the credit for the economic achievements under the Five Year Plans. Those petty-bourgeois fainthearts and deserters who today deny the proletarian, character of the Soviet Union are in effect trying to perpetuate this monstrous lie of Stalinism, but in a different .form. They assign these achievements to a “new exploitive class.” But planned economy and its successes are not, as these betrayers of Marxism claim, the product of a mythical new class of managers and bureaucrats. They stem directly from the October revolution whose banner Stalinism succeeded in usurping.
The program of industrialization and planned economy was literally forced upon the bureaucracy by the irreconcilable struggle of the Soviet proletarian vanguard, the Left Opposition (1923-29) led by Leon Trotsky. Having brought the country to the very edge of disaster by their domestic policy, the bureaucracy had no other recourse left except to adopt this program and to apply it in a terribly distorted form. Despite Stalin and against the Stalinist regime, the Soviet workers carried through on their shoulders the entire burden of the Plans. No amount of falsifications will alter these facts.
 
The Strangled Revolution Still Lives
For the last seventeen months, the working class of Russia has been compelled to fulfill, once again under the greatest handicaps and the most adverse conditions, the great historical task of the defense of the Soviet Union against imperialist attack. They entered into their titanic struggle against the Nazi invasion without their most qualified military leaders. Shortly before the outbreak of the war, Stalin beheaded the Red Army. In the space of a single year – May 1937 to May 1938 – the Red Army was stripped of all those commanders who had been recruited during the civil war. Together with them were removed those rank and file fighters who rose to command in the next 15 years. Between 30,000 and 40,000 officers were imprisoned, exiled or murdered. Among those executed was the flower of the General Staff – Tukhachevsky, Gamarnik, Yakir and the other generals who had modernized and mechanized the Red Army, who devised the strategy and plans of defense and who built the fortifications on the Western and Eastern fronts. In August 1940, Stalin crowned his crimes by assassinating Leon Trotsky, the only man to whom the Soviet masses could have turned with confidence for leadership.
Moreover, Stalinism has deprived them of their most powerful and reliable weapons and allies: the program of the socialist struggle and the aid of the revolutionary workers of Germany, Europe and the whole world. Even at this critical hour victory would be assured if the embattled masses of the USSR raised the banner of revolutionary struggle for socialism and summoned the workers of Europe, above all those of Germany, to join them in the struggle against the imperialist oppressors, “democratic” and fascist alike and for the establishment of the Socialist United States of Europe. But this road is barred by Stalin and the Soviet masses have to continue the fight thus handicapped. Every day, every hour of this isolated struggle drains away vital blood, vital territories. Because of Stalinism the Soviet Union has suffered staggering and unnecessary sacrifices and losses. The further continuation of the struggle poses more and more imperiously before the workers of the Soviet Union the problem of how to remove this Stalinist incubus without endangering the defense at the front.
Only traitors can spread the lie that this heroic and tragic struggle against such insuperable odds is a reactionary one. The Soviet soldiers, workers and peasants are fighting one of the most progressive wars ever fought. Beneath contempt are those who try to explain away their incredible military feats and resistance as a docility of slaves driven to slaughter. The truth is that they are not fighting to perpetuate the rule of the Stalinist bureaucracy. Nor are they fighting, as the Stalinist lie has it, a national war for the sake of “Holy Russia.” They are fighting and will continue to fight to the end in order to protect the conquests of the October revolution. They are demonstrating on the battlefields that the October revolution, although strangled, still lives on.
 


 In the fifth year of the Chino-Japanese war and in the third year of the second World War, the Oehlerites and Shachtmanites have suddenly discovered that it no longer is permissible for them to support China’s war for national emancipation.
For a time after their break away from us, the Oehlerites and Shachtmanites continued to repeat a few of the scientific formulas they learned in our movement but never completely understood. They accepted our position that the nationalist war of China must be supported despite the crimes of the Chinese bourgeoisie led by the butcher Chiang Kai-shek.
China’s war has unfolded since 1937 under Chiang’s leadership who continued his role as a willing agent of any imperialist whom he could approach. Still Oehler and Shachtman remained supporters. The second World War exploded. They saw no reason for change. To be sure, the Oehlerites decided to penalize the Chinese people by refusing to extend them material aid, because, they said, Chiang headed their struggle. The Shachtmanites for their part were “able to give only critical support to the Chinese struggle” (Labor Action, March 16, 1942). Nevertheless for the more than two and a half years of the war China remained assured of Oehlerite-Shachtmanite support. But not today! Why?
The Oehlerite position, presented in the name of the theory of the permanent revolution, can be summed up in one proposition. Marxists must now conclude that China’s role is today identical with that of Serbia in 1914, and that therefore, Oehler’s position in 1942 is the same as Lenin’s in 1914:
“In precisely the same way the Serbian national struggle was no longer supported by the Marxists when it became a phase of the first imperialist war” (International News, February 1942).
Lenin used to complain that a sectarian could so confuse issues in a few lines that twice as many volumes were needed to unravel the complex mess. We shall be as brief as possible.    
Lenin’s Position on the National Question Leninist policy on the national question is not reducible to an empty abstraction which may be applied in the same way, under all conditions, at all times, everywhere.
In his 1916 theses on the national question Lenin differentiated between three types of country.
“The first type—are those advanced countries of western Europe (and America) where the national movement is a thing of the past. The second type—eastern Europe, where the national movement is a thing of the present. And thirdly, the semi-colonies and colonies where it is in large measure in the future” (Lenin’s Collected Works, Russian edition, vol.XIX, pp.203-204).
Lenin was not splitting hairs. Nor was he quibbling about grammatical tenses. He was laying bare in this analysis the dialectic of history with regard to the national question. These three types represent three different paths of historical development. The tasks of the workers differ profoundly depending upon the type of country involved.
In the most advanced countries of Europe and America and in Japan the national issue is today simply a reactionary cover for the imperialist bourgeoisie. The national problem has been solved in these nations long ago. Here the revolutionists can and must advance immediately to socialism. Since 1914-18 the imperialist bourgeoisies have only further revealed themselves as the mortal enemies of their own nations and of all mankind. For the sake of preserving even a share of their profits and ruling positions they unhesitatingly slaughter millions, destroy vast wealth and betray the vital interests of their respective peoples. The American workers need only look at the French bourgeoisie and its Petain to discover the real attitude of the bosses towards their “nation.” Since the war of 1914-18 the lie of “defense of the fatherland” has become all the more monstrous and vile.
Among the countries of the second type Lenin included the “prison-houses of the peoples,” the empires of Austro-Hungary and Russia, and the Balkan cockpit of Europe. In these countries imperialist regimes were denying national independence to the Czechs, Slovaks, Serbs, Ukrainians, Poles, Finns, Letts, etc. In these countries, Lenin taught, the question of national independence plays a different role from that in advanced countries. Under certain circumstances it is progressive; under other conditions reactionary. What decides is whether or not in every given situation a small country plays an independent role in its struggle for national existence. If it does, then the Marxists say: Support of a national struggle in such a case is obligatory upon all workers. Thus, in an isolated struggle between a small country like Serbia and an oppressor nation like Austria, Lenin and the Serbian socialists supported Serbia. However, because of the overwhelming economic and political preponderance of the imperialist bourgeoisie, the small European countries cannot play such an independent role in the conditions of an imperialist war. They are too closely integrated economically and politically with the great powers to pursue their own nationalist goals at a time when the full power of the imperialists is unleashed. Lenin and the Serbian socialists never denied during the last war that the Serbs were fighting for their national existence. What they denied was the independent role of this struggle once Serbia became involved in the imperialist war. Serbia’s war then became completely subordinated to the aims and goals of the imperialists. To support Serbia under these conditions was to support the imperialist war.
“The national element in the Austro-Serbian war,” wrote Lenin, “has no serious significance in comparison with the all-determining imperialist competition” (Lenin’s Collected Works, Russian edition, vol.XIX, p.183).
The experience of the first World War and the post-war period has proved to the hilt Lenin’s analysis that the complete subservience of the small European countries to the great powers precludes for them the attainment of national independence through participation in the imperialist wars. Czech nationalism played a completely reactionary role, during the war as the ally of the “democratic” imperialist camp, after the war as a junior partner of victorious French imperialism; Czechoslovakia was herself an imperialist country, oppressing the Slovaks and the Sudeten Germans. Serbia emerged from the war not as an independent nation, but as an imperialist-vassal state (Yugoslavia) set up at Versailles. Polish nationalism supported the Central Powers against the “democracies,” and switching camps, also emerged as an imperialist oppressor of Ukrainians and Germans.
In the second World War, the fate of Czechoslovakia, Poland, Norway, Denmark, Finland, Roumania, et cetera, demonstrates that the small countries cannot maintain an independent existence but must line up with one or another camp whenever the showdown between the imperialists comes.
This does not mean that the small European countries should forsake their struggle for independence. But they can achieve a lasting and genuine independence only in one way, by joining the proletariat of the ranking imperialist countries in the struggle against the imperialist system, and for socialism. That is why Marxists, while refusing to support the small countries participating in the imperialist war, nevertheless raise the slogan of self-determination.
“The dialectic of history,” explained Lenin, “is such that small nations who are impotent as an independent factor in the struggle against imperialism, play the role as one of the ferments, one of the bacilli, aiding the arrival on the scene of the real force against imperialism, namely, the socialist proletariat.” (idem, p.270)
Lenin’s position in regard to the small European countries—after more than two decades in which the bourgeois national movements of these countries demonstrated their completely reactionary content—is as valid today as it was in 1914-18. Their struggles can be progressive only in isolated instances.   
Colonial and Semi-colonial Countries We now come to the third type of country—the colonies and semi-colonies of Asia, Africa and South and Central America. The world imperialist system consists of two diametrically opposed spheres: the metropolitan centers (the “mother-countries”) at one pole and the colonies and semi-colonies (the doubly enslaved peoples) at the other. The national task of the workers in the colonial and semi-colonial countries differs profoundly from that of the other two types. Their countries are integrated in a different way into the imperialist system. The oppression strikes at all classes in the colonies and semi-colonies with the exception of a tiny minority of native agents and partners of the imperialist rulers.
During the first World War there were also sectarians who tried to deny the duty of Marxists to give unconditional support to the nationalist mass movements in colonies and semi-colonies. Lenin explained:
“Is the actual position of the workers in the oppressor countries and those in the oppressed nations one and the same from the standpoint of the national question?
“No, it is not the same.
“1. The economic difference lies in this, that sections of the working class in the oppressor countries profit from those crumbs of superprofits obtained by the bourgeoisie of the oppressing nations, who always tear two skins from the backs of the workers of the oppressed nationalities ... the workers of an oppressor nation are to a certain extent partners of their  bourgeoisie in the latter’s plundering the workers (and the mass of the population) of an oppressed nation.
“2. The political difference lies in this, that the workers of the oppressor nations occupy a privileged position in a whole number of spheres of political life as compared with the workers of an oppressed nation.
“3. Ideologically or psychologically the difference is this—that the workers of oppressor nations are always educated both in schools and by life itself in the spirit of contempt or indifference toward the workers of oppressed nations.
“And so, in objective reality there is a differentiation all along the line” (Lenin’s Collected Works, Russian edition, vol.XIX, p.218).
Marxists give political expression to this differentiation in objective reality by singling out the different tasks confronting the workers of the oppressed nations with regard to the national question.
Today as in 1914-18, the task of the European workers, no matter what their country, is the accomplishment of the socialist revolution, i.e., resuming the road pioneered by the Bolsheviks in the Czarist empire of 1917. The national element—for all its importance—can play in Europe only the same subordinate role that it did in 1914 in the case of Serbia. But the workers in colonial and semi-colonial countries in Asia have before them, first of all, the objective tasks of the democratic revolution. For them the national question is the most burning and immediate. Whoever seeks to divert them from the solution of this task cannot speak in Lenin’s name.
When Lenin wrote his theses on the national question during the first World War, these semi-colonial and colonial struggles were still in the future. Despite, or rather because of this fact, he kept reiterating in the very midst of an imperialist war, that such struggles were progressive, and must be supported if and when they did occur. On October 14, 1914, Lenin said:
“The class-conscious proletarians in India and China cannot follow any but the national road, as their countries have not been formed as yet into national states. If China had to wage an aggressive war for this purpose, we could only sympathize with it, since objectively that would be a progressive war.” (Lenin’s Collected Works, English edition, vol.XVIII, p.69)
In August 1915, Lenin wrote:
“The socialists recognized and do recognize at this very moment the legitimacy, progressiveness and justice of ‘defending the fatherland’ or of a ‘defensive war.’ Far instance, if Morocco were to declare war against France tomorrow, or India against England, or Persia or China against Russia, et cetera, these wars would be ‘just,’ ‘defensive’ wars ... Every socialist would then wish the victory of the oppressed, dependent, non-sovereign states against the oppressing, slave-holding, pillaging ‘great’ nations.” (idem, p.220)
Dozens of similar quotations could be cited from Lenin’s speeches and articles during and after the first World War. The difference between Serbia and China remains no less profound today. It is impermissible even to talk about the theory of the permanent revolution unless one first understands that the position of the colonial and semi-colonial countries in relation to the imperialists is different not only in degree but in kind from that of the small European countries. The colonial and semi-colonial peoples can play and are playing an independent role not only in isolated struggles, but also in the very midst of an imperialist war.
National struggles of colonial and semi-colonial peoples are doubly progressive. First, the struggle tears vast masses of backward peoples out of barbarous systems, particularism and foreign bondage, and thus opens the road for their economic and cultural advancement. Secondly, it strikes mighty blows at the very heart of imperialism, and thus facilitates the struggle for socialism of the workers in Europe, the United States and Japan.
This was Lenin’s position. These principles were later incorporated in the programmatic documents of the first four World Congresses of the Communist International. The Trotskyist movement, the genuine continuator of Leninism, has never swerved from this position.
Lenin died in January 1924, on the eve of the first great movement of liberation in Asia. The Chinese revolution erupted in 1925. The Indian masses began to move in the late twenties.
Owing to uneven development the nationalist movement in the colonies and semi-colonies is today differentiated into: 1. those countries where it is a thing of the present (China, Ceylon, Malaya, Syria, India); 2. those where it is still largely in the future (Kenya Colony, Libya, Togoland, Liberia).
What is the criterion whereby Marxists determine whether a colonial or semi-colonial country is conducting a progressive struggle? We determine our position, first of all, on the basis of fact. Does this struggle play an independent role? If it does, we support it. The actions of the imperialists are decisive only to the extent that the nationalist element of the struggle is destroyed by them or their agents. Any one who opposes support of China’s war against Japan must first demonstrate that the nationalist element in China’s war against Japan has no serious significance in comparison with the direct intervention of China’s imperialist “allies.”
* * *
Marxists begin by taking the historical task as their point of departure. China must solve her national problem. Is China’s struggle today still a national struggle? Oehler still speaks of the Chinese armies as nationalist armies. This is precisely what we maintain. We support China’s war unconditionally, because, among other things, her armies are today still primarily waging a national war. Oehler calls our policy “spreading nationalist confusion.” The confusion, however, is in his own head and not in our Leninist policy.   
Petty-Bourgeois Confusionism Shachtman motivates his current position on China as follows:
“China’s struggle against Japan was progressive when it was an anti-imperialist struggle; it loses that characteristic when it becomes a struggle against one imperialist power conducted and directed by another imperialist power and its interests” (Labor Action, March 16, 1942).
No more than Oehler does he attempt to determine in fact whether or not what he claims has actually taken place.
To dispose of China’s nationalist struggle, Shachtman waves a magic wand and—presto! change-o!—“the character of the war has changed.”
“In the person of Chiang Kai-shek, China has become a tool in the hands of Anglo-American imperialism ...” (loc. cit.).
China—“in the person of Chiang Kai-shek”!
Chiang looms titanic in the imagination of many muddle-heads. But just how has the august person of Chiang wiped out the national struggle of China? Shachtman does not say.
Not so long ago Shachtman applied the self-same formula to the Soviet Union. He then argued in effect that “in the person of Stalin” the Soviet Union had become not only a tool of imperialism, but also a counter-revolutionary state, etc., etc., and hence unworthy of his support. Apparently he now wishes to extend this same formula to China. But why stop there? Why is India exempted? If Anglo-American imperialists ever had a tool, they surely possess one in the person of Nehru. Hitler is operating as best he can with Bose. Thus far, the score stands: for China—one tool in one imperialist camp, for India — two tools in two camps. According to Shachtman’s logic it would therefore follow that India’s national struggle is twice-damned and doubly unworthy of his “critical support.”
Chiang is a counter-revolutionary scoundrel today, as he was yesterday, as he will be tomorrow. Nehru will try to repeat in India all the abominations of Chiang, in China. If this is a cogent argument for not supporting China or India, then how could the question of support have ever arisen? Why has Shachtman supported China all these years? No, this undeniable fact is only an argument for conducting an irreconcilable struggle against these and all other representatives of the colonial and semi-colonial bourgeoisies. A Marxist would draw from this the conclusion that the nationalist struggle must be guided in such a way as to make it easier for the masses to learn from their own experience the true nature of such bourgeois leadership. We propose to help the movement to sweep over the heads of the treacherous bourgeois leadership and thus gain the opportunity for a real proletarian leadership to come to the fore. But to do this, one must not turn one’s back on the movement beforehand. We remain supporters of national struggles whether they are led by Chiang in China, by Nehru or Bose in India. This is what we mean by unconditional support. But this does not at all mean that so far as the outcome of the struggle itself is concerned, the leadership is of no consequence. On the contrary, the question of the leadership is of paramount importance. That is why we are irreconcilable opponents of Chiang, Nehru, Bose and Co. and their respective bourgeoisies.
To invoke Chiang Kai-shek’s role as tool of “Anglo-American imperialism” settles nothing in and of itself. A tool is one thing; a finished job is something else again. If Shachtman means to say thereby that Chiang’s role is automatically reducible to that of Wang Ching-wei, the Japanese puppet opposing China’s independence, he is merely employing a piece of sophistry which falsifies present reality and is fatal to a really revolutionary policy.
It goes without saying, England and the United States hope to establish the same relationship in China with respect to Chiang that Japan has with Wang. But have they already established it as Japan has? We answer, emphatically no!
To invest his reasoning with a semblance of seriousness Shachtman tries to adduce historical illustrations. China, he says, now occupies the same position as “that occupied by countries like Ethiopia and Libya, Slovakia and Norway” (Labor Action, March 16, 1942).
Oehler with his Serbia is rational in comparison with this mish-mash.
Slovakia and Norway lie prostrate under the Nazi boot, but at no time did Shachtman propose to defend those “fatherlands.” China’s armies are fighting against the same invader today as when Shachtman was for the defense of this fatherland.
For both Slovakia and Norway the national question was decided long ago; the only path open for them is to join directly and immediately in the struggle for the Socialist United States of Europe. In short, China’s position is not the same as Slovakia’s and Norway’s but just the opposite.
In Ethiopia England now rules through Haile Selassie’s regime. Libya is still in Italy’s hands by grace of Hitler and Rommel. For both Ethiopia and Libya the national struggle lies ahead. Their present position is not comparable to that of Norway, Slovakia or China.   
Can China’s War Change Character? To justify his latest betrayal of Marxism, Shachtman points in two opposite directions with one hand to European peoples whose sole progressive road is socialism, and with the other to African peoples who have not yet entered the road of national existence. Shachtman’s crime consists in deserting the existing  nationalist struggle in the semi-colonial country of China, just as he deserted the defense of the Soviet Union.
Naturally, should China’s imperialist “allies” establish ther domination over China as absolutely as, say, England has over Ethiopia, then China’s war against Japan would remain her war in name only. However, to pose the question of a change in the character of China’s war, it is first of all necessary to demonstrate that the relationship of forces has unquestionably shifted in favor of the imperialists. This is the crux of the whole issue.
The only semi-coherent argument adduced by either Oehler or Shachtman for their flip-flop on China is the declaration by Britain and the United States of war against Japan. Oehler blurts this out: “Before the imperialist war (December 7, 1941) we classified the Chinese struggle as progressive.” Shachtman employs a shame-faced evasion: “Up to recently, to defend China in her war with Japan was righteous and just ...”
We await a rational explanation of just how the Japanese imperialists succeeded in also blowing up China’s war by bombing Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941 (or “up to recently”).
For reasons known only to himself, Shachtman drags in Burma to support his position on China: “The Chinese Army is ... already fighting on Burmese soil to maintain the imperialist rule of the British bourgeoisie ...”
Shachtman declares that the Chinese troops in Burma are fighting on behalf of Anglo-American imperialism. Is this so? Yes and no. More no than yes. The Anglo-American imperialists have a stake in the defeat of the Japanese in Burma as elsewhere, but this is not the only factor in that particular segment of the struggle. The victory of the Chinese forces in Burma over Japan would give a tremendous impetus to the national-revolutionary movement in all Asia, including that of the Burmese peasants, and would bulwark the independence of China.   
The Real Situation in China The existing Burmese situation proves just the contrary of what this petty-bourgeois confusionist seeks. Japan is better situated to assert her domination over the insurgent peasants of Burma than both England and the United States are today in relation to China. Should the Burmese peasants therefore suspend their struggle for liberation? Should the Marxists on this account refuse to support them?
It is incomprehensible how anyone can support—and correctly so! — a peasant struggle in such an unstable relationship of forces as that in Burma and in the same breath withdraw support from the struggle of the Chinese people who are in a far more advantageous situation.
A demagogue might invoke the Burmese struggle to say that those who are today supporting China bear their share of responsibility for the blood of any insurgent Burmese peasants slaughtered by Chiang in Burma.
But Chiang is also covered from head to foot with the blood of Chinese workers and peasants whom he butchered yesterday as he still does today. Only a Shachtman could imply that any of this blood-guilt is borne by those who support China today just as they have during all these years, despite and against Chiang.
The extension of military hostilities does not and cannot eliminate the national question. On the contrary, it sharpens this struggle in the extreme degree, especially in colonial and semi-colonial countries. Above all, China and India.
The outbreak of hostilities between Japanese and Anglo-American imperialism has, in actual fact, complicated rather than solved Japan’s difficulties in China. On the other hand, China is freer today to play an independent role vis à vis Anglo-American imperialism than at any other time since 1937.
The imperialists in both camps cannot at will transform colonial and semi-colonial struggles into their opposite. They have the will, but they lack the magic powers with which both Shachtman and Oehler endow them. As matters stand at present, all the imperialists who unquestionably intend to destroy nationalist struggles if  given the opportunity, are not crushing these struggles but are involuntarily doing just the opposite in relation to China and India.
Yes, these bandits are now up to their necks in the dangerous game of supporting Chinese and Indian nationalist movements. Hitler and Japan fan the.flames in India. The United States and England are committed to the same maneuver in China, hoping to spread the revolt to Manchuria, Korea, Formosa. Each hopes to weaken thereby his imperialist opponent today, and then to strangle these movements on the morrow. Japan feels sure she can repeat in India what she did in Korea. American imperialists think they can repeat in China their past performances in the Philippines, Cuba, Panama. This is easier said than done. Meanwhile, China is in position to profit from the contradictions in the imperialist camps. So is India.
The intentions of the ruling classes by no means decide great issues. Let us recall two historical instances.
During the Civil War, England and France gave aid to the South. Lincoln’s government entered into a de facto alliance with Czarism. Russian warships under the command of Grand Duke Alexis appeared in San Francisco harbor at one of the critical junctures in the relations between Washington and France and Great Britain. Thus, in order to defend its national existence and independence, the most progressive government in the world at that time, the United States, was obliged to ally itself with the most reactionary regime in the world—Czarist Russia. This fact did not prevent Marx from wholeheartedly supporting the war of the North against the South, and against the South’s imperialist backers.
Toward the end of the eighteenth century, two of the most reactionary regimes in Europe, the monarchy of France and the monarchy of Spain, supported the struggle of thirteen insurgent English colonies in North America. Both of these feudal empires possessed vast colonies of their own on this continent. In supporting the American revolution of 1776, the French and Spanish monarchs were intent primarily on dealing a blow to their rival, mighty England, then rising to supremacy. They doubtless proposed to deal with these colonial upstarts at their leisure at some future time. Spanish and French armies and navies fought, side by side, with the forces of the American revolutionists. From the conflict America emerged as an independent nation, signing a separate peace with England in defiance of her pact with France. The Royal Exchequer of France already sadly depleted was further drained by the considerable cost of French support to the American revolution. The financial bankruptcy of the French monarchy, as is well known, played a part in bringing about its downfall and unleashing the Great French Revolution a decade later. It is likewise well known that as a direct consequence of the French revolution, the Spanish monarch toppled from his throne. Very little remained of the colonial empires of France and Spain in the western hemisphere.
Many other examples could be cited to show that time and again the ruling classes found colonial and national-revolutionary movements passing over their heads and taking entirely different direction from the one they had expected and planned for.
The contradictions which are now convulsing all imperialists surpass in intensity the contradictions besetting the French and Spanish monarchies in the eighteenth century. This is especially true of Japan — today the main enemy of China, just as Britain is today  the main enemy of India.
The Japanese empire now sits astride the volcano of agrarian revolution at home and has temporarily added to her social volcanoes abroad (Korea, Manchuria, Formosa) those of Indo-China, Malaya, Philippines, Java, Sumatra, Borneo, Burma, etc. The Mikado’s strategists are bent on further warming their posteriors on the already white-hot lava of India.
The Chinese revolution, despite seventeen years of terrible bloodletting, still smoulders. Great lessons, great experiences, great traditions have been accumulated. By no means the least of these are the traditions and experiences of the years of struggle against Japan. The decisive battles of this war are still ahead.
India’s struggle for liberation strengthens China and is in its own turn strengthened by the latter. All the millions of Asia are watching, learning, waiting. To the Indian workers we say: China’s struggle is your struggle. Support it. Whoever tells you otherwise is not your friend, but the friend of your enemies.
Not so very far from Asia stands the Soviet Union where the socialist revolution still lives on. Traitors have turned against the USSR, but not the masses of Asia. They are waiting, watching, learning, preparing to act. Our task is to aid them and not to deal them blows.
From all this we draw the conclusion that the chances of the nationalist movement in Asia sweeping over the heads of all the imperialists are far greater in 1942 than they were in America in 1774.
Oehler and Shachtman today say in effect: Chiang is the main enemy. We, on the contrary, say to the Chinese workers: The Japanese invader is the main enemy. Fire at Japan first—and shoot with anybody who shoots in the same direction. In this way you are best preparing yourselves to assume the leadership of the Chinese nation today. In this way you will best be able to deal on the morrow with all the traitors from Chiang down.
Given the opportunity, Chiang will again betray the Chinese people as he has done so many times in the past. Roosevelt and Churchill are depending a lot on Chiang whom, like Shachtman and Oehler, they identify with the Chinese nation. Only they place a plus where Shachtman and Oehler put a minus sign. At the same time, it is by no means excluded that a section of the Chinese bourgeoisie, particularly the one led by Chiang, may decide that they can strike, after all, a better bargain with Tokyo. Meanwhile, the final outcome will be decided not by the plans in the minds of statesmen but by the struggle itself. To intervene and participate in this struggle, it is necessary to equip the Chinese masses with a correct program, tell them who their main enemy is today so that they may concentrate their fire in the right direction.
The divergence between us, on the one hand, and the sectarians and the petty-bourgeois confusionists, on the other, is not at all accidental. It represents the divergence between Marxism and pseudo-Marxism. Those who orient themselves in politics on the basis of a principled method, i.e., the Marxist dialectic, invariably find themselves in conflict with those who operate with sterile formulas and those who slither all over the landscape, depending upon episodic developments in the field of diplomacy, or moves on military maps, or the most recent impressions.
In May 1940 Leon Trotsky predicted: “By its very creation of enormous difficulties and dangers for the imperialist metropolitan centers, the war opens up wide possibilities for the oppressed peoples. The rumbling of the cannon in Europe heralds the approaching hour of their liberation.” This prediction is beginning to be realized before our very eyes. The peoples of Asia are stirring to life. A revolutionary situation exists in India; her chances for a successful struggle for emancipation have never been so great as they are at the present time. China’s possibilities for success are increasing. We are passing through the critical juncture in the imperialist epoch when the nationalist element in the colonies and semi-colonies is assuming titanic proportions. The Oehlerites and Shachtmanites have chosen precisely this moment to desert the struggle for national emancipation in one of its chief centers, China! Yet these people are trying to issue directives to the revolutionary vanguard in the name of the theory of the permanent revolution. This spectacle would be funny, if it were not so pathetic.
Real Marxists will give unconditional support to China’s war against Japan and to India’s struggle for national existence. The nationalist struggles of the Chinese and Indian peoples against Japan and England are indispensable and integral parts of that great revolutionary tidal wave in the colonial countries which, merging with the impending socialist revolution in the advanced countries, will sweep away forever the decayed imperialist system.


 The official Moscow press continues to arrive in this country only after long delays. The files are far from complete. The material now available consists of scattered issues covering the months of January, February, March and April of the current year.
The most striking thing about the propaganda for home consumption is the emphasis placed upon the year 1942 as the year of victory. In its leading editorial on January 1, Pravda solemnly pledged:
“The new year must become—and it will actually become the year of the complete annihilation of Hitlerite Germany.” (Emphasis in the original.)
“In 1942 we shall strangle, we shall tear to pieces and finish off the bloody beast that attacked us so vilely.”
The same issue carries a letter to Stalin from the citizens of the Sverdlovsk region in the Urals. This letter bears the signatures of 1,017,237 individuals “engaged in enterprises, collective farms, machine and tractor stations, and state farms.” It strikes the same keynote:
“For Hitler the year 1942 is the fatal date, it is the year of ignoble doom, of obscure death.”
This promise of definitive victory as an immediate perspective has been incessantly reiterated. On April 24, Pravda declared:
“The fighters of the Red Army have whipped the enemy in the winter and they will continue to whip him during the spring and summer; our troops will continue to drive out the invaders from the Soviet land and they will not allow the initiative to slip from their mighty hands right up to the complete annihilation of the Hitlerite bandits.”
These boasts of impending victory were accompanied by a renewed campaign in the press designed to deify Stalin. The central formula throughout this period reads as follows:
“The leader of our army, Comrade Stalin is confidently leading the Red Army to the annihilation of the invading enemy-forward to the emancipation of all the peoples enslaved by German fascism.” (Pravda, Jan. 1, 1942.)
Stalin’s name, assures Pravda, is “the symbol of victory.”
Stalin’s speeches are invested with magical military properties, especially his speeches of November 6 and 7, 1941:
“On November 6th the whole world heard Comrade Stalin’s report ... to the effect that whoever stepped on our soil to occupy it must be and would be annihilated. Twenty days after the historical speech of Comrade Stalin the German received the first crushing blow beneath Rostov.” (Pravda, Jan. 6, 1942.)
In the next day’s leading editorial, Pravda revealed that in his speeches of November 6 and 7
“Stalin, the genius, already foresaw the signs of the coming breaking point in the course of the war.” (Pravda, Jan. 6, 1942.)
Here are some of the ritualistic paeans published in praise of the “great leader of the Soviet people and director of all the armed forces of our country”:
“Stalin—the farsighted helmsman of the Soviet ship of state.”
“Stalin—this is the Lenin of today.”
“Stalin—the living incarnation and embodiment of the strength and greatness of spirit of the Soviet people.”
“The glorious leader of the Red Army, its Commander-in-chief, the father and friend of the peoples—Great Stalin.”
“For the Fatherland! For Stalin! With these words on their lips the defenders of the fatherland go to meet the enemy, surround them, annihilate them.”
The New Year’s letter from Sverdlovsk, already cited above, contains this declaration:
“Everyone knew that Stalin is with us, and this caused privations to be forgotten, lightened all hearts, made the marksmen shoot straighter and sped all work.”
The letter concludes:
“Forward for the Fatherland! For Stalin! Forward with Stalin! For Freedom! For Victory! For Our Happiness!”
The successes of the Red Army last winter were thus utilized by the bureaucratic regime primarily to bolster up its prestige. The Kremlin sought to cover up its responsibility for the previous terrible defeats and losses by assurances that the war had reached a breaking point, that only victories lay ahead. Stalin’s sadly tarnished reputation as “organizer of victories” had likewise to be restored. Drunk by temporary successes, the Stalinists apparently threw all caution to the wind.
The question naturally arises: What will the effect be of the latest terrible military reverses? Once again the Soviet masses have been caught unawares, if they believed the promises of the Kremlin. Instead of the victories promised them, they are suddenly confronted with new disasters. Stalin has once again dealt the most fearful blows to Soviet morale.
His latest campaign of self-glorification will have consequences just the opposite of those he sought. Through it he has succeeded in further compromising his regime in the eyes of the masses. Having taken credit for all the winter successes, he cannot now evade the full responsibility for all the defeats that followed.   
The New Officer Corps Among the important developments of the war is the rise of a new officer corps. Kharitonov, Remizov and Lopatin, the generals credited officially with the recapture of Rostov last November, are three recent appointees. Also newly appointed are: Lieutenant-General I.S. Konev, commander of the Kalinin front; Lieutenant-General P.A. Kurochkin, commander of the northwestern front; Colonel-General A.I. Yeremenko and Lieutenant-General M.A. Priskayev.
In January, 13 other generals were singled out and decorated: 1) Belov; 2) Boldin; 3) Govorov; 4) Lelyushenko; 5) Rokossovsky; 6) Sokolovsky; 7) Beloborodov; 8) Vlassov; 9) Golikov; 10) Golubev; 11} Yefremov; 12) Zakharkin; 13) Kuznetsov. All of them are likewise new to the roster of Soviet general officers.
Wholesale new appointments have apparently become the rule. On January 2 there were four lieutenant-generals and 16 major-generals appointed; on January 3—one lieutenant-general and six major-generals; on January 6—four rear admirals and two major-generals; January 10—nine major-generals; January 19—six major-generals; January 22—one colonel-general, one lieutenant-general and seven major-generals; January 25—one lieutenant-general and six major-generals. For the space of these three weeks alone the total amounts to four rear-admirals, one colonel-general, seven lieutenant-generals and 52 major-generals.
This process continued throughout the following months. Thus, on March 25 Pravda reported six new major-generals; on March 28—four lieutenant-generals and 13 major-generals.
To the hundreds of new generals must be added thousands and tens of thousands of lower ranking officers. The old officer corps, which has been in this way superseded, owed its rise entirely to bureaucratic connections. It was handpicked from top to bottom after the blood purges of 1937-38. A considerable number of the new officers, especially from among the lower ranks, appear to have gained their posts on an altogether different basis, i.e., through ability and merit demonstrated in the very heat of battle. The future will tell to what extent this has weakened Stalin’s stranglehold on the army.   
The Condition of the Communist Party The Bolshevik Party of Lenin and Trotsky drew in hundreds of thousands of new fighters into its ranks during the Civil War of 1918-20. One might naturally expect that the enormous mass upsurge in the Soviet Union would find its reflection in the growth of the only legal political party in the country and moreover the party which is supposed to wield the power. But that is not at all the case. The party is stagnating in the regions behind the lines. Those new recruits that have been added come predominantly from the ranks of the administrative and governmental apparatus. Pravda cites as an example the situation in the Chelyabinsk oblast:
“For the entire past year and for the two months of the current year the party organization of this oblast has accepted as candidates of the party 660 workers, 289 collective farmers and 2,025 government employees. From among the candidates there have been accepted as members into the party 903 workers, 389 collective farmers and 3,515 government employees. The figures show that the growth of the party organization has occurred primarily at the expense of government employees: more than 70 per cent of the comrades accepted as candidates and members of the party are—government employees. Even in such an organization as that of Magnitogorsk the workers constitute only 35 per cent of the total number accepted into the party.” (Pravda, April 22, 1942.)
After painting such a picture of “growth,” Pravda immediately adds:
“The party district committees in Karakulsk, Mishkinsk, Uksyansk and Shatrovsk have accepted only a single individual each into the party during January and February of this year; the Galkinsk and Dalmatovsk regional committees did not accept a single individual.”
The bulk of the party has for a long time consisted of functionaries. The war has apparently reinforced the deterinitiation of the bureaucrats to permit entry only to those from their own caste. The resulting bureaucratic shell is completely isolated from the masses. Pravda’s statistics for Chelyabinsk graphically reveal this isolation which is further emphasized by figures released by Pravda on January 18 relating to the numerical strength of the party organization, in the city of Rostov. After the unprecedented mass upsurge of last November, when the German armies were swept out of Rostov by the joint struggle of the civilians and the Red Army, the Stalinists were able to claim only 5,000 members of the party in the entire area. The population of Rostov alone is more than half a million. This means that less than one per cent are enrolled in the party.
In most areas close to the front lines the conditions are far worse. Pravda is compelled to report “serious changes” in the ranks of the party even in the central Moscow region where the membership has dropped sharply. The official explanation offers two reasons:
“In connection with the mobilization into the army and the evacuation of industrial enterprises the number of party members has decreased.” (Pravda, Jan. 14, 1942.)
There is, however, a third reason for the drop. An inkling of it is given in the report of a party committee of an unspecified region recaptured from the Germans during the winter. The report states:
“The regional committee of the party decided that it was first of all necessary to call together the cadres of the activists and to reestablish the organs of Soviet power in the liberated localities. Not all of the people returned to their former posts. Among them were to be found also those who revealed in the critical moments the souls of grafters, cowards, and traitors ... New and tested cadres of party and non-party Bolsheviks were advanced.” (Pravda, Jan. 16, 1942.)
Two things are admitted by this report: first, that the party ceased to exist and function the moment the Germans conquered the region and had to be reconstituted from the top after reoccupation by the Red Army; and second, that the party ranks are riddled with unreliable and corrupt elements who either run away or desert to the enemy. Grafters, cowards, traitors—this is how Stalin’s own organ characterizes an obviously considerable part of Stalin’s party!
It is of course impossible to estimate the actual proportion of this human scum. But it is in any case clear that part of the losses in party membership in the areas near the front cannot be accounted for in any other way than by the readiness of a section of the Stalinist bureaucracy to desert the field of battle or to go over to the side of the victorious enemy.
Not so long ago the Kremlin sought to justify its monstrous blood purges by the claim that in this way the “Fifth Column” had been destroyed. Now comes the official admission that the murder of the whole generation of Bolsheviks who together with Lenin and Trotsky made the October Revolution has only facilitated the entry into the party of “grafters, cowards and traitors.” By all his policies, above all his strangulation of the party, Stalin has promoted rather than retarded the development of a “Fifth Column” in the USSR.   
The Bureaucracy Behind the Lines In our previous articles we have already reported that a section of the bureaucracy behind the lines refused to make any sacrifices or to adjust itself to the necessities of the war in the initial period of the struggle. The same situation prevailed throughout the winter. After more than six months of war, in the midst of the winter successes of the Red Army, Pravda still continued to reason with this gentry and to plead with them to mend their ways.
In a leading editorial we find the following almost incredible statements:
“It is necessary to live more modestly than has been the case. By renouncing all sorts of superfluities not only in the country’s economy but also in day-to-day life, it is possible to give greater means to the front. In time of war it is necessary to economize in everything; it is necessary to expend raw materials and supplies, fuel and foodstuffs with exceptional zealousness. A regime of rigid economy can save enormous resources for the front.” (Pravda, Jan. 5, 1942.)
But in addition to refusing to live “more modestly,” the bureaucracy utilizes the war in order to cover up its arbitrariness, inefficiency and mismanagement. The same editorial immediately adds:
“In the meantime it is to be observed that here and there some people are hiding their poor work, their incapacity and lack of management, and at times even their crimes behind the pretext of war difficulties. The dining rooms are filthy ... What has the war to do with this? The streets are covered with snowdrifts ... What has the war to do with this? There is fuel in the warehouses but the regional soviet does not take the bother to deliver it to the dwellings—what has the war to do with this? There are not a few facts relating to the worsening of services supplied to the population not because, let us say, products are lacking, or fuel, or the means of city transportation but on the contrary because the local party and soviet organizations forget about their perpetual Bolshevik duty—to be concerned daily about the needs of the population.”
Throughout the month of January, Pravda kept reminding these forgetful bureaucrats about their duty. They “forgot” to provide the population with food, fuel and transportation. They “forgot” to clean the snow from the streets. “For several days in Kazan the car-lines have not functioned (on account of snow-falls). These car-lines unite the center of the city with the periphery and hundreds of people have been coming daily late to work.” (Pravda, January 5, 1942.) They “forgot” to keep the dining rooms clean. In some places they “forgot” even to provide spoons!
“Many factory committees of the Ivanovsk oblast ... interest themselves either little or hardly at all with the functioning of factory dining rooms ... In the factory Balashavo, the dining room functions unsatisfactorily ... it has been without spoons for a long time.” (Pravda, January 16, 1942.)
They “forgot” about the public baths, the sole means whereby the workers can keep clean and avoid infection.
“In Chelyabinsk the baths were not fixed up for the winter. It is necessary to stand in line for hours in order to get a bath.” (Pravda, January 5, 1942.)
Pravda reports with alarm the attitude of the authorities in the Novosibirsk oblast:
“The most dangerous thing is that the agricultural organs of the oblast are little concerned about the fate of the next harvest.” (Pravda, Jan. 15. 1942.)
It appears that some of these people are so absent-minded that they have simply forgotten that the war is on:
“And there are still among us,” complains Pravda, “not a few backward enterprises; not a few leaders who have succumbed to the inertia of peace-times—leaders who are carefree and negligent. A firm working regime has still not been established in all the collective farms, machine and tractor stations and soviet farms.” (Jan. 10, 1942.)
In the vital sphere of railroad transportation the situation is no less ominous. With characteristic understatement the January 25 Pravda says that “It is impermissible to say that all the railroads are supplying industry as they should.”
Speaking about industry in general, Pravda has this to say in a leading editorial on January 11:
“There are in the meantime still some administrative workers in industry who do not approach the fulfillment of military orders from the point of view of the state ... Administrative workers who supply a different product from the one now needed by the front are cheating the country.”
It is clear that the war has not had the effect of bridging the abyss between the bureaucracy and the people. On the contrary, the bureaucracy is brought by the war into an increasingly sharper conflict with the army and the mass of the population. Admonitions or threats from above have little effect. Each local bureaucrat is law unto himself. He is immune from any pressure from below, because the mass is not permitted to criticize or intervene in any way. That is why individually and collectively, the bureaucrats “forget” and cheat and continue to commit all their abominations and crimes. It is hardly necessary to point out how this hits at the front and at the morale of the entire population.
The only remedy for the situation is to restore the democracy in all organizations which used to prevail in the USSR under Lenin and Trotsky. Only in this way could effective control be exercised over the direction of the industry, the army and the country. The restoration of workers’ democracy in the Soviet Union is now a life and death issue for the embattled workers’ state. But the bureaucracy, beginning with Stalin, resists all tendencies toward democratization.
Among the gravest crimes of the bureaucracy is its treatment of the evacuated millions. The world has been told a great deal about the alleged miracles performed in the evacuation of industries. It goes without saying that in this sphere the Soviet masses have been able to accomplish with nationalized property feats inconceivable under a regime of private property. But under the bureaucratic rule of Stalinism the cost and the waste have been frightful.
The plight of the evacuated millions had by January of this year become so desperate that Pravda was compelled to take official notice of it:
“In a number of eastern districts and oblasts of our country there has arrived a great number of people evacuated from the territories temporarily occupied by the enemy, and also from the zones closest to the front. The party and the government are extending great assistance to the evacuated population. But not all of the city and regional executive committees of the local Soviets have done everything that is necessary and possible in the way of providing the arrivals with working conditions, in the way of securing them with shelter, fuel, medical aid and food. It is possible and necessary to build quickly dwellings of a temporary type for the workers of the evacuated enterprises, but in a number of regions this construction is being done, slowly, badly.” (Pravda, Jan. 5, 1942.)
Here is an official admission that “in a number of regions” where the evacuated population came for refuge it has had to live without adequate food, fuel and medical supplies. They lacked even temporary shelter. And this in the midst of winter! How could they have operated the evacuated factories under these conditions? How did they survive the winter?
On January 15, Pravda carried a special section headed: It Is Necessary to Take Concern About the Needs of the Evacuated Population. Cited under this title are “facts of bureaucratism and unconcern towards people.”
“In certain localities,” admits Pravda, “there has been evinced a spirit of formalism and at times even a heartless attitude toward the evacuated population.”
A group of workers evacuated to the Murashinsk region, Kirov oblast, writes:
“The evacuated comrades are working in a furniture factory. Nobody bothers here about the living needs of people. There is no dining room in the factory. Some of the comrades have not been supplied with living quarters. Just what are the trade union organizations busy doing in this factory?” (Pravda, Jan. 15, 1942.)
Another letter in the same issue reports:
“Not all of the local organizations show the necessary attention to the evacuated population. Some of them limit themselves to taking care only of the native population, and behave towards the new arrivals as if they were aliens. Such manifestations are absolutely intolerable. The party organizations must eliminate the inadequacies existing in this connection and do everything that is necessary as quickly as possible.” (Idem)
Even bureaucrats and their families upon being evacuated suffer such treatment. That is one of the reasons why Pravda was forced to make a public issue of the situation. It is impossible to reconcile the contradiction between the immune, arbitrary, greedy and self-seeking bureaucracy and the needs of the country in war time. The two clash in every sphere of activity. The graver the military situation becomes, all the sharper grows the conflict.
The war has incontestably demonstrated that the Stalinist bureaucracy is the greatest internal obstacle, both in its war policies and its conduct at home, to the victorious defense of the USSR.



At the beginning of May we wrote that “judging from the past procedure, it can be stated with virtual certainty that the present wave of arrests will reach its crest early in June, in the days immediately preceding the elections, and that shortly after the elections the next trials will be staged.” (Socialist Appeal, May 7, 1938.)
The first part of this forecast has been completely confirmed by recent dispatches from Moscow. Kossior and Chubar, two of Molotov’s deputies and yesterday pillars of Stalinism, have been “missing” for weeks. The secretaries of party organizations in the Ukraine, Kazakstan, Kirghizia, and Bashkiria have been removed.
 
Sukhomlin Out
Sukhomlin, former member of the Ukrainian Political Bureau, has been removed from his post as vice-chairman of the Ukrainian Council of People’s Commissars. Sukhomlin’s downfall leaves only one member still remaining of the 13 who composed the Ukrainian Political Bureau at the beginning of the latest purge.
The purge has been extended to lower officials in Biro-Bidjan. Harold Denny, in reporting the latest purge in the Ukraine, cites the arrest of 10 important party officials and comments as follows: “The fact that confessions have been obtained indicates a trial will be held or that a secret one has been held.” (N. Y. Times, June 20.) On June 21, the Times carried a dispatch concerning “an intensive purge in the political ranks of the army” which is being directed by Mekhlis, Stalin’s former private secretary. These and many other additional facts are indubitable proof that the current purge is as widespread and intensive as the preceding ones.
Everlasting Purge
To have forecast this latest development required no particular prophetic gifts, but rather an understanding of the inextricable position in which the Stalinist clique is situated, and the mechanics whereby it has thus far maintained itself in power. In the face of growing internal and external difficulties it has and can have only one formula: Purge, purge and re-purge – with the periodic “elections” serving as a cover for the bloodbaths. The only difference between the past and present purges is that the current one has received far less publicity both in the Soviet and foreign press.
We have already pointed out on several occasions the intimate connection between the crisis in Soviet economy and the purges. Is the economic crisis one of the causes of the current purge?
Only the other day Harold Denny broke a rather prolonged period of silence to report “progress” and “gains” in Soviet economy. (N.Y. Times, June 5.) Denny, who has apparently supplanted Duranty (so mysteriously silent) as foreign press agent for Stalin’s “victories,” centered his extremely optimistic dispatch on the alleged fact that “industry as a whole has been increasing production from month to month this year after a poor start in January.”
 
Duranty Style
Denny wrote this dispatch in the familiar Duranty manner, arraying statistics, citing “average increases,” indicating “further progress” and so on, with a few evasive comments on past difficulties, calculated to cover the report with an air of objectivity. According to Denny (and the official Stalinist press which Denny echoes), the current purge is taking place against the background of economic recovery.
But from Denny’s own dispatch we learn that at the beginning of the year Soviet industries were disorganized and the state planning apparatus had broken down. Further on, Denny gave another inkling as to the real extent of the crisis: “... just when the second Five-Year-Plan was drawing to a close, no third Five-Year-Plan was announced.” The reason? “Trotskyist-Bukharinist wreckers,” of course! After thus glibly linking up the “exposure” of the “Wreckers” with the unprecedented failure to even announce a new plan, Denny stated the following:
“The disorganization of industry was one cause of the purge that took such toll of industrial executives last year. The purge itself caused further disorganization by the removal of experienced executives and technicians and the discouragement of initiative among those remaining.”
 
What We Learn
And so, we learn: (1) that Soviet industries were “disorganized” not only at the beginning of this year but throughout all of last year; (2) that this critical condition of industry was one of the causes of the purge (and of the Moscow frame-ups!); (3) that in the process of this purge the bulk of the administration staff was removed; (4) that this “removal of experienced executives and technicians’’ only acted to aggravate further the “breakdown of industry.”
What then caused the alleged miraculous improvement? Denny assures us that “new executives” were now mastering their jobs. But he himself is obliged to list grave “lapses’” in such branches of industry as “coal, copper, petroleum and the like.” He likewise reports a lag in the cement industry. “The same is true of timber.” This “lag” is holding up construction “both of industrial plants and dwellings.” Denny also comments on a shortage of paper supply and textiles. Yet, to believe Denny and the Stalinist press, industry as a whole has nevertheless been increasing its production.
 
Unfounded Optimism
There is no ground whatever for the official optimism which Denny has dished up in his dispatch. Apart from the purge itself, those official statistics that are still issued by Stalinist authorities (reports of average daily production in industry have been suspended for months) give the lie to assurances that Soviet industry is being pulled out of the rut. Far from increasing, the production of steel, iron and rolled products has been stagnating. The figures for May and June even indicate a serious decline. We cite the figures for the coal industry. Since the beginning of the year the daily average (in thousands of tons) has been as follows:



 


Sov. Union


 


Don Basin




January


373.5


227.0




February


365.2


225.3




March


355.4


224.4




April


349.8


213.6




May (first part)


326.6


203.3



The surprising thing is not that the crisis in Soviet economy is still raging, but that Soviet economic life has not been more drastically affected. How long could industry in any capitalist country have functioned after “removal” of its staff of experienced executives and technicians?
What, then, has thus far prevented a complete collapse in the Soviet Union? There is only one answer. It has been prevented by the colossal force that is lodged in the nationalized means of production, the real foundation that Stalinism has been undermining all these years. But how long can the debacle be averted? How long will the blood-baths and the reign of terror continue to maintain Stalinism in power?
 




Walter (Dostoievsky) Duranty Reports for Duty
In recent years Duranty’s journeys to Moscow coincided with sensational developments there. When the monstrous Moscow frame-ups were staged, Duranty just happened to be there, with handy references to Dostoievsky to explain everything. Duranty’s latest appearance in Moscow is providing him with an opportunity to do more “explaining” in the field of Vyshinsky’s “justice,” involving, this time, the Robinson-Rubens enigma – regarding which, incidentally, his reticence for two whole months was as mysterious as that of the G.P.U.
 

Duranty Tries to Minimize the Crisis
To account for a grave decline in such key industries as steel, coal, and transportation, Duranty begins by qualifying it merely as a “recession” and a government reduction of “daily production norms”, a procedure, if you were to believe Duranty, that is “not unprecedented” but only “sufficiently unusual to merit attention.” Nothing serious, you understand. In point of fact, “objectively speaking,” it is a species of growing pains. For, according to optimistic Walter, one of the prime reasons for the decline is ‘’the vast extent of industrialization and the speed at which it is being carried on” (N.Y. Times, February 9) Has the basic equipment of industries been undermined, as we have reported in the Socialist Appeal, and as is apparent from even a cursory reading of the Soviet Press? Pish and piffle, implies Duranty. The lathes and machines have merely “aged.” And adds: “In the circumstances it is not surprising that they have aged rapidly – the wonder is that they stand up at all.”
From Duranty’s own report it appears that imports of machinery from abroad have had to be resumed “in a big way” in an attempt to remedy this grave condition. The population is suffering, among other things, from a shortage of butter, which is being exported to pay for machinery. “The Russians are grumbling ... from Leningrad to Rostov and from Moscow to Sverdlovsk.”
But Duranty has a simple formula with which to dismiss this “trifle.” Says he: “The answer is simple – the Bolsheviki prefer machines to butter.” Duranty, you will observe, is as “simple” in his explanations as fascists like Goering, who also speak for the preferences of the German people, declaring they, for their part, prefer guns to butter.
 

Duranty Falsifies Statistics
Against this background of facile and dishonest explanations, Duranty proceeds to juggle with official statistics, and as a result conveys the impression that the actual drop was not so serious after all. For instance, he reports the cut in norms for steel as being from 57,900 tons daily in December to 57,000 tons in January; and in coal a cut from 403,500 to 385,200 tons. All he “forgets” to do is to report that there were two cuts in January, and that the figures he cites were maintained only for the first few days in that month. For the greater part of January the official norm for coal was set at 384,000 tons, while for steel the norm was cut to 54,700 tons, i.e., almost four times the cut reported by Duranty.
But the slickest stunt Duranty pulls is in “reporting” the actual output attained. In this sphere he prefers to use “percentages,” and glibly reports an “average production of 90 per cent.” After all, you see, all that is involved here is a mere lag of “10 percent.” According to official Soviet figures the production in steel has been averaging only 50,000 tons daily; in coal 360,000; and in car loadings around 75,000 (as against the original plan of 95,000).
The decline has been most catastrophic in railways. Duranty prefers to overlook this item as due to “seasonal” factors,” although the Soviet press has been filled with “alarm signals” over the situation. We have already cited in this column numerous passages from Pravda in this connection. We limit ourselves to one additional quotation from that paper, which prints a dispatch relating to the breakdown of the important Stalinsk railway and charges that the failure of the key station on that road has practically closed down the metallurgic plants in the South. According to this dispatch: “No one here even bothers to consider the fact that because of the poor functioning of the station the furnaces are not operating and entire branches of metallurgical plants are not working at full capacity.” (Pravda, January 31)
 

Crisis Sharper Than Officials Admit
On the basis of Duranty’s dispatch we can state with certainty that the economic crisis is far graver than could have been gathered from the official statistics, even taking into consideration their notoriously falsified character. For one thing this can be established from the fact that Duranty evades mentioning those aspects which the Soviet press itself has been drumming on. (He does not even breathe a word about the difficulties in spring sowing!) On the other hand, Duranty implies that even further cuts are to be expected. He states that the import of machines and equipment will be increased in the future, and indicates that Soviet industry is almost entirely without reserves “to cover breakage repairs and replacements – for which they are now paying the price.” Ominous words indeed! Furthermore, his dispatch makes public a crisis in precisely those key industries – oil and steel – in which the official press has been claiming “successes” of late. If Duranty has been permitted to prick the bubble of Stalinist claims on the eve of the third Five-Year Plan, it is only because the ruling clique seeks to prepare public opinion for a slight “recession.” The job of Stalin’s ace foreign correspondent is precisely to cover up the full extent of the crisis by admissions of “minor” and “temporary” difficulties.
 

Other Soviet Dispatches Equally “Colored”
The tendentious nature of reports from Russia that have recently appeared in the N.Y. Times extends to other fields as well. Thus, on February 10, the Times printed a dispatch on the current purge, without Duranty’s by-line, but with a familiar note. The idea the “dispatch” tries to sell is that the current purge is also neither “unprecedented” nor so very extensive. The anonymous correspondent has the gall to state that under Lenin there were “bigger and better” purges. We reproduce this piece of falsification verbatim: “Numerically, as great as such expulsions have been, they do not compare with the great purge of 1921, when, it was estimated, one-third of the party were expelled or placed on probation.” The 1921 “purge” took place at the close of the Civil War, when the party membership did not number more than 1,500,000 (as against four million at the beginning of Stalin’s purge), when tens of thousands of Bolsheviks had fallen on the field of battle, and when, after the victory, shady elements and careerists were attempting to flood the ranks of the party. The purge then was directed against this scum, and not against those in any way connected with the October revolution, as is the case at present. By printing these and similar falsifications – with which we shall deal in future issues – the N.Y. Times is repeating its record of the early days of the October Revolution; when its columns were open to every conceivable kind of anti-Bolshevik rumor and slander. Isn’t it a little premature for the Times’ editors to drop their pretence of carrying only news that’s “fit to print?”
 



The following article is a summary presentation of material contained in a pamphlet on this subject by the writer, which is planned for early publication.
The more indefensible and iniquitous becomes the course pursued by the Anarchists in Spain, the louder their confrères abroad cry about Kronstadt. During the years of revolutionary upsurge, the Anarchists, the Mensheviks, the SRs et al., were on the defensive. Today, Stalinism has provided them with a demagogic cover for an offensive against those principles which alone made October possible. They seek to compromise Bolshevism by identifying it with Stalinism. They seize upon Kronstadt as their point of departure. Their theorem is most “elementary”: Stalin shoots workers only because it is the essence of Bolshevism to shoot down workers; for example, Kronstadt! Lenin and Stalin are one. Q.E.D.
The whole art lies in distorting historical facts, monstrously exaggerating every subsidiary issue or question on which the Bolsheviks may have erred, and throwing a veil over the armed uprising against the Soviet power and the program and aims of the mutiny. Our task is primarily to expose the distorters and falsifiers at work on the historical “facts” that serve them as a basis for their arraignment of Bolshevism.
First as to the background of the mutiny. Far from occurring at a time when the Soviet power was out of danger (as the ideological adversaries of Bolshevism imply), it occurred in the year 1921, a crucial year in the life of the workers’ state. By December 1920 the fronts in the Civil War were liquidated. There were no “fronts” but the danger still remained. The land with the barbaric heritage of Asiatic Czarism had been literally bled white by the havoc of the imperialist war, the years of Civil War and of imperialist blockade. The crisis in foodstuffs was aggravated by a fuel crisis. Vast sections of the population faced the immediate prospect of dying from hunger or freezing to death. With industry in ruins, transportation disrupted, millions of men demobilized from the army, the masses on the point of exhaustion, fertile soil was indeed available for the intrigues of the counterrevolution.
Far from reconciling themselves to defeat, the White Guards and their imperialist allies were stirred to new activity by the objective difficulties confronting the Bolsheviks. They made attempt after attempt to force a breach “from the inside”, banking largely upon the support of petty bourgeois reaction against the difficulties and privations accompanying the proletarian revolution. [1] The most important episode in this series took place in the very heart of the revolutionary stronghold. In the naval fortress of Kronstadt, a mutiny flared on March 2, 1921.
Nowadays a Dan says blandly: “The Kronstadters did not at all begin the insurrection. It is a slanderous myth.” [2] But in 1921, the SRs crawled out of their skins to make light of the uprising and all that it implied, while the Mensheviks tried to minimize and explain it away as something really unimportant in itself. The SRs vowed that “the peaceful character of the Kronstadt movement was beyond any doubt”; if any insurgent steps were taken, they were only “measures of self-defense”. Here is what the Mensheviks wrote not in the year 1937 but in 1921 when the events were still fresh:
The fact that Kronstadt’s break with the Soviet power assumed the character of an armed uprising and ended in a bloody tragedy is of secondary importance in itself and, to a certain extent, accidental. Had the Soviet power evinced a little less granite hardness towards Kronstadt, the conflict between it and the sailors would have unfolded in less grave forms. This, however, would have in no way changed its historical significance ... Only on March 2, in reply to repressions, threats, and commands to obey unconditionally did the fleet reply with a resolution of non-recognition of the Soviet power and place two commissars under arrest. [3]
When Mensheviks originally presented their version of the Kronstadt events, they did not at all deny that Kronstadters began the mutiny. To be sure, they tried to convey the impression that there was more than ample justification for this in the alleged “repressions, threats, and commands”. But you will observe that they simultaneously tried to evade the nub of the issue, the uprising itself, as a fact after all, of little importance, secondary, and even “accidental”. Why this glaring contradiction? They themselves supply the answer. It is their open avowal that this mutiny unfolded on the basis of anti-Soviet aims and program. [4] The truth being what it was, it is hardly surprising that Berkman rushed to give us his oath for it that the Kronstadt mutineers were really “staunch adherents of the Soviet system” and were “earnestly seeking to find, by means friendly and peaceful, a solution of the pressing problems”. [5] In any case, these purveyors of “truth” are all agreed upon one thing, namely, that these “staunch” partisans of the Soviet power proceeded in the friendliest spirit of peace to take up arms – on the basis of a resolution of “non-recognition of Soviet power”. But they did it, you see, “only on March 2”.
“Only on March 2”! Every pertinent detail must be dolled up, otherwise the truth might not be so palatable. By this formulation, the Mensheviks, who only echo the SRs, intend to evoke in the reader’s mind, if not years and months then at least weeks of “provocation”, “threats”, “commands”, “repressions”, etc., etc. But stretch their chronology as they will, these historians together with their neophytes cannot antedate March 2 except by reference to events “towards the end of February”. Their history of Kronstadt dates back as far as (and no further than) February 22 – for occurrences not in Kronstadt but in Petrograd. As for Kronstadt itself, they can anticipate March 2 only by reference to February 28! Count as they will, they have at their disposal: three days and three resolutions. March 2 with its resolution of non-recognition of the Soviet power is preceded only by March 1 with its resolution for “freely elected Soviets”. What happened within this interval of less than 24 hours to cause this swing from one alleged pole to its diametrical opposite? The only answer we get from the lips of the adversaries is the following: a Conference took place at Kronstadt. And what happened there?
Each “historian” gives his own account. Lawrence [6] would have it, that the Conference was called for the purpose of drawing up and passing a resolution. Berkman insists that it was rather a gathering “to take counsel with the representatives of the Government.” [7] The SRs swear that it was an electoral body, gathered for the specific purpose of electing a new Soviet, although the incumbent Soviet’s term had not yet expired. [8] To believe Berkman (and Lawrence), the Kronstadters were provoked to mutiny by Kuzmin’s speech. In this they only improve on the SRs who blame Kuzmin and Vassiliev. [9]
The most complete account of Kuzmin’s speech is to be found in Kronstadt Izvestia, i.e., the organ of eye witnesses and chief participants at the Conference. Here it is:
Instead of calming the meeting comrade Kuzmin irritated it. He spoke of the equivocal position of Kronstadt, patrols, dual power, the danger threatening from Poland, and the fact that the eyes of all Europe were upon us; assured us that all was quiet in Petrograd; underscored that he was wholly at the mercy of the delegates and that they had it in their power to shot him if they so willed. He concluded his speech with a declaration that if the delegates wanted an open armed struggle then it would take place – the Communists would not voluntarily renounce power and would fight to the last ditch. [10]
We leave it to future psychologists to decide why the SRs chose to treat the contents of Kuzmin’s speech in a different manner from Berkman’s, and why they refrained from resorting to quotation marks as Berkman and Lawrence do in referring to Kuzmin’s concluding statement. We cannot here take up in detail the glaring discrepancies in the various versions. Suffice it to say that the more we learn about Kuzmin’s speech the more acutely the question poses itself: Just who did play the part of provocateur at this meeting?
A special point is made in all accounts of the fact that Kuzmin insisted that Petrograd was quiet (Berkman adds – on whose authority? – ”and the workers satisfied”). Why should this have provoked anybody who was not being goaded into provocation? Was Kuzmin telling the truth? Or did the Kronstadt Izvestia lie when in its very first issue, on the next day, it carried a sensational headline: General Insurrection in Petrograd? Moreover, why did Izvestia keep lying about this and other alleged insurrections? Why did it even reprint dispatches from Helsingfors to bolster up its campaign of slander? In short, take Kuzmin’s speech point by point as reported by Izvestia – or in any of the alleged summaries of it – yes, with or without Berkman’s insidious quotation marks – and tell us not whether you are “simple men”, “men and not old women”, etc., etc., but whether if you had been delegates at this meeting to “elect a new Soviet”, you would have thereupon stayed and appointed a “Provisional Revolutionary Committee”? Tell us, furthermore, whether you would have taken up arms in mutiny against the Soviet State? If not, why do you peddle this SR garbage and seek to confuse the vanguard of the working class with regard to what actually took place in Kronstadt – and especially at this meeting?
An incident far more ominous and elucidating than anything that Kuzmin might or might not have said took place at this gathering, which all the Berkmans slur over in a very tell-tale fashion. The Conference was thrown into a frenzy not by anything said by Kuzmin or Vassiliev (or Kalinin who was not present), but by a statement made from the floor that the Bolsheviks were marching arms in hand to attack the meeting. It was this that precipitated the “election” of a Provisional Revolutionary Committee. We look in vain in the writings of the “truthful” historians for any clarification as to the source of these “rumors”. More than that, they conveniently “forget” (Berkman among others) that the Provisional Revolutionary Committee officially laid this rumor at the door of the Bolsheviks themselves. “This rumor was circulated by Communists in order to breakup the meeting.”(Izvestia, No. 11.) Izvestia furthermore admitted that the “report” that the Bolsheviks were about to attack the meeting with “fifteen carloads of soldiers and Communists, armed with rifles and machine guns” was made by “a delegate from Sevastopol”. Even after the suppression of the mutiny the SRs insisted that “according to the testimony of one of the authoritative leaders of the Kronstadt movement”, the rumor about Dulkis and the Kursanti was true. Not only were rumors spread throughout the meeting, but the chairman concluded on this self-same note. From the account in Kronstadt Izvestia we learn that: “At the very last moment, the comrade chairman made an announcement that a detachment of 2,000 men was marching to attack the meeting, whereupon the assembled body dispersed with mingled emotions of alarm, excitement, and indignation ...” (No. 9, March 11, 1921.)
Who spread these rumors and why? We say: The ones who circulated them were the same people who spread the lies about the insurrection in Petrograd; the very ones who raised the slogan of the Constituent Assembly at the beginning and then switched to the “more realistic” slogan of “Down with the Bankrupt Commune!” (resolution adopted in Kronstadt on March 7); the very ones who charged that the “Bolshevik power had led us to famine, cold and chaos”; those who, masquerading as non-partisans, were duping the masses in Kronstadt; those who were seeking to capitalize on the difficulties of the Soviet power, and who headed the movement in order to guide it into the channels of the counterrevolution.
There is not a shadow of doubt that the SRs were the prime, if not the sole, movers of this campaign of “rumors”, which brought such infamous fruit. Any possibility for a peaceful solution of the Kronstadt crisis was eliminated, once a dual power was organized in the fortress. Time was indeed pressing, as we shall shortly prove. However one may speculate about the chances for averting bloodshed, the fact remains that it took the leaders of the mutiny only 72 hours to lead their followers (and dupes) into a direct conflict with the Soviets.
It is by no means excluded that the local authorities in Kronstadt bungled in their handling of the situation. The fact that the best revolutionists and fighters were urgently needed at vital centers would tend to support the contention that those assigned to so relatively “safe” a sector as Kronstadt were not men of outstanding qualifications. It is no secret that Kalinin, let alone Commissar Kuzmin, was none too highly esteemed by Lenin and his colleagues. The affinity between “mistakes” and such individuals as Kalinin is wonderful indeed but it cannot serve as a substitute for political analysis. In so far as the local authorities were blind to the full extent of the danger or failed to take proper and effective measures to cope with the crisis, to that extent their blunders played a part in the unfolding events, i.e., facilitated for the counter-revolutionists their work of utilizing the objective difficulties to attain their ends.
How was it possible for the political leaders to turn Kronstadt so swiftly into an armed camp against the October revolution? What was the aim of the mutineers? The supposition that the soldiers and sailors ventured upon an insurrection merely for the sake of the slogan of “Free Soviets” is absurd in itself. It is doubly absurd in view of the fact that the rest of the Kronstadt garrison consisted of backward and passive people who could not be used in the Civil War. These people could have been moved to insurrection only by profound economic needs and interests. These were the needs and interests of the fathers and brothers of these sailors and soldiers, that is, of peasants as traders in food products and raw materials. In other words, underlying the mutiny was the expression of the petty bourgeois reaction against the difficulties and privations imposed by the conditions of the proletarian revolution. Nobody can deny this class character of the two camps. All other questions are only of secondary importance. That the Bolsheviks may have committed errors of a general or concrete character, cannot alter the fact that they defended the acquisitions of the proletarian revolution against the bourgeois (and petty bourgeois) reaction. That is why every critic must himself be examined from the standpoint as to which side of the firing line he finds himself. If he closes his eyes to the social and historical content of the Kronstadt mutiny then he is himself an element of petty bourgeois reaction against the proletarian revolution. (That is the case with Alexander Berkman, the Russian Mensheviks, and so on.) A trade union, say, of agricultural laborers may commit errors in a strike against farmers. We can criticize them but our criticism should be based upon a fundamental solidarity with the worker’s trade union and upon our opposition to the exploiters of the workers even if these exploiters happen to be small farmers.
The Bolsheviks never claimed that their politics were infallible. That is a Stalinist credo. Victor Serge, in his assertion that the NEP (i.e., a limited concession to unlimited bourgeois demands) was belatedly introduced, only repeats in a mild form the criticism of an important political error which Lenin himself sharply recognized in the spring of 1921. We are ready to grant the error. But how can this change our basic estimate? Far outweighing a speculation on the part of Serge or anybody else that the mutiny could have been avoided if only the Bolsheviks had granted the concession of the NEP to Kronstadt, is the mutiny itself and the categorical declaration of Kronstadt Izvestia that the mutineers were demanding “not free trade but a genuine Soviet power” (No. 12, March 14, 1921).
What could and did this “genuine Soviet power” signify? We have already heard from the SRs and Mensheviks their estimate of the basis of the mutiny. The SRs and Mensheviks always maintained that their aims were identical with those of the Bolsheviks but only that they intended to attain them in a “different” way. We know the class content of this “difference”. Lenin and Trotsky contended that the slogan of “Free Soviets” signified materially and practically, in principle as well as essence, the abolition of proletarian dictatorship instituted and represented by the Bolshevik party. This can be denied only by those who will deny that with all their partial errors the policies of the Bolsheviks stood always in the service of the proletarian revolution. Will Serge deny it? Yet Serge forgets that the elementary duty of a scientific analysis is not to take the abstract slogans of different groups but to discover their real social content. [11] In this case such an analysis presents no great difficulties.
Let us listen to the most authoritative spokesman of the Russian counterrevolution on his evaluation of the Kronstadt program. On March 11, 1921, in the very heat of the uprising, Miliukov wrote:
This program may be expressed in the brief slogan: “Down with the Bolsheviks! Long Live the Soviets!” ... “Live the Soviets,” at the present time most likely signifies that the power will pass from the Bolsheviks to the moderate socialists, who will receive a majority in the Soviets ... We have many other reasons for not protesting against the Kronstadt slogan ... Is it self-evident for us, that leaving aside a forceful installation of power from the right or the left, this sanction [of the new power – J.V.] which is of course temporary, can be effected only through institutions of the type of the Soviets. Only in this way can the transfer be effected painlessly and be recognized by the country as a whole. [12]
In a subsequent issue Miliukov’s organ, Poslednya Novosti, insisted that the Bolshevik power could be supplanted only through Soviets “freed” from the Bolsheviks. [13]
In their defense of the Kronstadt mutiny, the Mensheviks as staunch partisans of capitalist restoration, held essentially the same viewpoint as Miliukov. Together with the latter, the Mensheviks defended in Kronstadt a step towards the restoration of capitalism. [14] In the years that followed they could not but favor in the main Stalin’s course (advised by Abramovich and others in 1921) of “decisively breaking with all adventurist plans of spreading the ‘world revolution’”, and undertaking instead the building of socialism in one country. With a reservation here and a bleat there, they are today quite in favor of Stalin’s gospel of socialism in one country. In this, as in remaining true to the banner raised by the Kronstadt mutiny, they only remain true to themselves – as the arch-supporters of every open or veiled trend toward capitalist restoration in Russia and capitalist stabilization in the rest of the world.
The connection between the counterrevolution and Kronstadt can be established not only from the lips of the adversaries of Bolshevism but also on the basis of irrefutable facts. At the beginning of February when there was no sign of any disturbances either in Petrograd or nearby Kronstadt, the capitalist press abroad published dispatches purportedly relating to serious trouble in Kronstadt, giving details about an uprising in the fleet and the arrest of the Baltic Commissar. [15] These dispatches, while false at the time, materialized with amazing precision a few weeks later.
Referring to this “coincidence”, Lenin in his report to the Tenth Party Congress on March 8, 1921, had the following to say:
We have witnessed the passing of power from the Bolsheviks to some kind of indefinite conglomeration or alliance of motley elements, presumably only a little to the right and perhaps even to the “left” of the Bolsheviks – so indefinite is the sum of political groupings who have attempted to seize power in their hands in Kronstadt. It is beyond doubt that concurrently the White Guard General as you all know-played a major part in this. This has hen proved to the hilt. Two weeks prior to the Kronstadt events, the Parisian press already carried the news that there was an insurrection in Kronstadt. (Works, Vol. XXVI, p. 214.)
It is an easily established fact that when these dispatches came to the attention of Trotsky, before any outbreaks in Kronstadt, he immediately communicated with the Commissar of the Baltic fleet warning him to take precautions because the appearance of similar dispatches in the bourgeois press referring to other alleged uprisings had been shortly followed by counterrevolutionary attempts in the specified regions. It goes without saying that all the “truthful” historians prefer to pass over in silence this “coincidence”, together with the fact that the capitalist press seized upon the mutiny to conduct an “unprecedented hysterical campaign” (Lenin). [16] News items in this campaign could be adduced to any number, but no list would be complete without the reports on the same subject that appeared in the Kronstadt Izvestia:
First issue, March 3: “GENERAL INSURRECTION IN PETROGRAD.”
March 7: Headline “Last Minute News From Petrograd” – ”Mass arrests and executions of workers and sailors continue. Situation very tense. All the toiling masses await an overturn at any moment.”
March 8: “The Helsingfors newspaper Hufvudstadsbladet ... prints the following news from Petrograd ... Petrograd workers are striking and demonstratively leaving the factories, crowds bearing red banners demand a change of government-the overthrow of the Communists.” [17]
March 11: “The Government In Panic.” “Our cry has been heard. Revolutionary sailors, Red Army men and workers in Petrograd are already coming to our assistance ... The Bolshevik power feels the ground slipping from under its feet and has issued orders in Petrograd to open fire at any group of five or more people gathering in the streets ...”
It is hardly surprising that the White Guard press abroad launched an intensive drive to raise funds, clothing, food, etc., under the slogan: “For Kronstadt!”
How explain away this array of facts and incontrovertible evidence? Very simply: By charging the Bolsheviks with slander! No one is more brazen than Berkman in denying the connection between the counterrevolution and the mutiny. He goes so far as to declare flatly that the Czarist General Kozlovsky “played no role whatever in the Kronstadt events”. The admissions of the SRs themselves, and Kozlovsky’s statements in an interview he gave to the press, establish beyond all doubt that Kozlovsky together with his officers openly associated themselves from the outset with the mutiny. Kozlovsky himself was “elected” to the “Council of Defense”. Here is how the Mensheviks reported Kozlovsky’s interview:
“On the very first day of the insurrection the Council of Military Specialists had elaborated a plan for an immediate assault on Oranienbaum, which had every chance for success at the time, for the Government was caught off guard and could not have brought up reliable troops in time ... The political leaders of the insurrection would not agree to take the offensive and the opportunity was let slip.” [18]
If the plan failed, it was only because Kozlovsky and his colleagues were unable to convince the “political leaders”, i.e., his SR allies, that the moment was propitious for exposing their true visage and program. The SRs thought it best to preserve the mask of “defense” and to temporize. When Berkman wrote his pamphlet he knew these facts. Indeed, he reproduced the interview of Kozlovsky almost verbatim in his pages, making, as is his custom, a few significant alterations, and hiding the real source of what appears as his own appraisal.
It is no accident that Berkman and his neophytes have to plagiarize from all the Kozlovskys, and the SRs and the Mensheviks. The rejection by the Anarchists of the Marxian analysis of the state inevitably leads them to the acceptance of any and all other views up to and including participation in the government of a bourgeois state.
How much time was there to “negotiate”? The mutineers were in control of the fortress on March 2. Both Kozlovsky and Berkman vouch for the fact that the Bolsheviks had been “caught by surprise”. Trotsky arrived in Leningrad only on March 5. The first attack against Kronstadt was launched on March 8. Could the Bolsheviks have waited longer?
Many military experts hold the opinion that the failure of the mutiny was largely due to the failure of the ice to thaw. Had the waters begun to flow freely between Kronstadt and Leningrad, land troops could not have been used by the Soviet Government, while naval reinforcements could have been rushed to the insurgents already in control of a first class naval fortress, with battleships, heavy artillery, machine guns, etc., at their disposal. The danger of this development is neither a “myth” nor a “Bolshevik slander”.
In the streets of Kronstadt ice was already thawing. On March 15, three days before the capture of the fortress in a heroic assault in which 300 delegates of the Tenth Party Congress participated, No. 13 of Kronstadt Izvestia featured on its front page an order to clear the streets “in view of the thaw”. Had the Bolsheviks temporized, they would have precipitated a situation that would have taken an immeasurably greater toll of lives and sacrifices, let alone jeopardizing the very fate of the revolution.
When all these historians cite the names of the fortress and the names of the warships Petropavlovsk and Sevastopol – the ships that in 1917 had been the main support of the Bolsheviki [19] – they carefully avoid mentioning the fact that the personnel of the fortress as well as of the warships could not have possibly remained static throughout the years between1917 and 1921. While the fortress and the ships remained well-nigh intact physically, a great deal happened to the revolutionary sailors in the period of the Civil War, in which they played a heroic part in practically every sphere. It is of course impossible to paint the picture as if the Kronstadt sailors had participated in the October revolution of 1917 only to remain behind in the fortress and the ships while their comrades-in-arms fought the Wrangels, Kolchaks, Denikins, Yudenitches, etc.
But that is, in effect, what the opponents of Bolshevism attempt to imply with their harping on the words “Kronstadt”, “revolutionary sailors”, and so on. The trick is all too obvious. Trotsky’s recent reply to Wendelin Thomas which pricks this bubble could not but have aroused their ire. With contemptible hypocrisy, all of them rise in fake indignation against Trotsky’s pretended slur on the “mass”. Yet in replying to Thomas, Trotsky merely rephrased the facts he brought out in 1921: “A great many of the revolutionary sailors, who played a major part in the October revolution of 1917 had been in the interim transferred to other spheres of activity. They were replaced in large measure by chance elements, among whom were a good many Latvian, Estonian and Finnish sailors, whose attitude to their duties was that of holding a temporary job and the bulk of whom were non-participants in the revolutionary struggle.”
There is no spectacle more revolting than that of people who have, like the Anarchists and Mensheviks, been among other things the co-partners of Stalinism in its People’s Frontism, and who bear the responsibility for the massacre of the flower of the Spanish proletariat, pointing an accusing finger at the leaders of the October revolution for putting down a mutiny against the revolution: It was all the fault of the Bolsheviks. They provoked the Kronstadters, etc., etc.
There is no denying that the SRs and Mensheviks are experts, if not final authorities, on provocation. Nothing that Kerensky and Co. did ever provoked them even to justify the taking up of arms against the Provisional Government. On the contrary, the Mensheviks were very emphatic in 1917 in their demands that revolutionary Kronstadt – and Bolsheviks in general – be “curbed”. As for the SRs, they did not long hesitate to take up arms in the struggle against October. Bolshevism always did “provoke” these gentlemen who have invariably taken their positions on the other side of the barricades.
These are the incontestable facts. The sailors composed the bulk of the insurgent forces. The garrison and the population remained passive. Caught off guard by the mutiny, the Red Army command at first sought to temporize, hoping for a shift in the moods of the insurgents. Time was pressing. When it became obvious that there was no possibility of tearing the grey mass from the leadership of the SRs and their henchmen, Kronstadt was taken by assault. In so doing the Bolsheviks only did their duty. They defended the conquests of the revolution against the plots of the counter-revolution. That is the only verdict that history can and will pass.
 




Litvinov’s Removal Certain
The oft-repeated rumors concerning Litvinov’s downfall in connection with the purge of the diplomatic corps will be substantiated in the near future. His post has already been stripped of its previous significance, for, on a motion by Beria, the Supreme Council voted to establish a permanent committee on Foreign affairs which, in effect, supersedes the Commissariat for Foreign Affairs. The chairman of this committee of eleven (on it are Beria, Mekhlis, and Khruschev) is none other than Zhdanov, member of the Politbureau, who excoriated Litvinov’s Commissariat in his speech at the session. The Chairman has the power not only to guide and alter foreign policy but to intervene in the appointment of ambassadors, etc. Because of the role played by Litvinov and his public prominence, it is quite likely that a special “method” will be used in his case. Rumors, which appear to be officially inspired, have been circulating that Litvinov will “retire” in six months, and his place taken either by Zhdanov or Potemkin, with the latter appearing to have the inside track.
While the stage is being prepared for Litvinov’s “retirement”, Stalin’s hangmen are mopping up the Commissariat itself. Among those just liquidated is Sabanin, head of the legal department of the Commissariat for Foreign Affairs, and a close friend of Litvinov’s. Together with him, four other functionaries were placed under arrest: Fachner, Neumann, Shakhov and Beckman.
In the case of Litvinov, the blows aimed at him, as well as inevitable elimination, are intimately linked with a change of Soviet foreign policy that is doubtless being contemplated by Stalin.
 

The Case of A.N. Tupolev
Perhaps the most sudden and least expected of the recent purgings was that of Andrei N. Tupolev, head of Tsagi (Soviet Aerodynamic Institute), one of the world’s outstanding aeronautical engineers and inventors, creator of the Red Air Force, better known to, the general public by his initials ANT which used to appear on Soviet planes, in particular, ANT 25 which made the record Moscow-San Diego flight. The Special correspondent of the Paris Temps, Pierre Berland, gives some interesting details relating to Tupolev’s downfall in a communication devoted entirely to the current purge (Le Temps, Jan. 1).
As Berland comments, “Tupolev was perhaps the most decorated man in the Soviet.” He was given the Order of Lenin, the Order of the Red Star, and that of the Red Labor Banner. Privileges were heaped upon him. He had a vast luxurious apartment in Moscow and a summer house. And, according to Berland, the Government opened for him an unlimited bank account to use for his experimental and construction work. He had free entrance to the Kremlin and even, it is reputed, to Stalin, an honor accorded only to Voroshilov and Yezhov. He was likewise chummy with Voroshilov. It goes without saying that he was designated as candidate for the Supreme Council. When his name was removed at the last moment from the roll of deputies, the world learned of his fall from grace. Officially, of course, there has been no news. The darkest rumors are circulating as to his fate. Many of his colleagues have been placed under arrest. At a recent meeting of the workers of Tsagi a “party representative” (i.e., G.P.U. functionary) urged the assembly to unmask the “Tupolevites,” declaring that a “ruthless struggle” must be waged against this latest variety of the enemies of the people, the “Tupolevites,” in no way to be distinguished from the “Trotskyites,” “Bukharinites,” “Rykovites,” etc. etc.
Tupolev’s initials have been removed from all planes, even from ANT 25, with which Gromov established the world record. It is now only a number: 25.
Soviet circles are reported as lost in speculation as to the reasons for Tupolev’s arrest. Comments Berland: “It may well be that Tupolev objected to the methods of the purge which was creating breaches in the war industries. No official comment has appeared as yet to provide a key to this mystery. The customary accusations of sabotage-espionage seem hardly applicable to a Tupolev. All his achievements gainsay the charge of sabotage. As for espionage, it bears no semblance of truth. He had nothing to gain and everything to lose from a change in the regime.”
To the crushing blows he has dealt to the Soviet Army and Navy, Stalin has now added a blow at the Air Force, which the bitterest enemy of Russia could not have hoped for in his most sanguine moments.
Berland reports among those arrested as “Nazi terrorists.” one Nissen, a crack camera man, usually detailed to cover big events. It was he who took pictures of the unanimous vote for the Constitution in the great hall of the Kremlin on Dec. 5, 1936.
 

Shadows over Stakhanovism
The Soviet press, in general, and Stalin’s lackey and apologists abroad, in particular, used to raise a howl whenever anyone pointed out either the disruptive effects of Stakhanovism on Soviet industry (the more Stakhanovists in a plant the lower the output) or the fraudulent and spurious nature of many of the records. It may sound unbelievable but it is nevertheless a fact that both Izvestia and Pravda on the same day (Jan. 9) in their leading articles admit the baneful effects and frauds of Stakhanovism, in guarded but plain terms. Says Pravda: “Certain enterprises are still being carried away by organizing for individual records to the detriment of organizing the Stakhanovist work of entire brigades, shifts, and plants.” The editorial then goes on to warn the managers, engineers and technicians not to “forget” their duty of assuring to each worker “the opportunity for over-fulfilling the norm.” And then Pravda adds the following eloquent statement:
“Some industrial directors countenance a sporting attitude toward individual high records and, as was to be observed in the Donbas, countenance therewith even fraud, ascribing the results achieved on the basis of a division of labor between a group of workers to a single individual alone. The sooner we put an end to such distortions of the Stakhanovist movement, the more the country will benefit from it. A correct leadership of the Stakhanovist movement ... leads to the growth of the productivity of labor not only of individual record holders, but of entire groups of workers, and entire guilds.”
Economic difficulties, especially those in connection with the spring sowing campaign, are compelling the ruling clique to revise its attitude toward one of its pet panaceas, Stakhanovism. A retreat has already started. Shortly scapegoats will be produced. An “exposé” of record-holders is in the cards.
 




The French press has reflected the great indignation and resentment that has been aroused by the action of the French judicial authorities in allowing a G.P.U. agent, implicated in the murder of Ignace Reiss, to escape. The newspaper le Jour undertook an independent investigation into the case, and on February 2 appeared with the following headlines:
SPIEGELGLASS, HEAD OF G.P.U., ORDERED REISS’ MURDER IN PARIS
FOR THE FIRST TIME SOVIET AGENTS HAVE OVERSTEPPED THEIR CUSTOMARY CAUTION
After recounting the details surrounding the murder of Reiss, le Jour charges that Spiegelglass had been sent to Paris on a special mission to effect a “purge” among the secret agents there. When the Grosovsky couple, to whom Reiss had entrusted his letter to the Kremlin, which was to be forwarded with the diplomatic mail, handed over the letter to Spiegelglass, the latter immediately ordered the assassination of Reiss.
 

Murder Operatives Summoned
Two G.P.U. agents were summoned. We cite from the article:
“One of these Russian agents was resident in Paris, the other, according to our information, was merely passing through. But it so happened that these two men chosen for the task found different excuses for evading it. One pleaded an urgent mission, the second found some other excuse. But one of these two agents, the non-resident in Paris, was amicably inclined toward Reiss. He wished to warn him of the terrible danger that threatened. Tell it to Reiss personally? That would compromise him beyond repair. He hit upon an ingenious method to do so without revealing his identity. He phoned Reiss, who was in a cafe, and said: ‘This is X speaking ...’ Then he hung up. He repeated this procedure three times.”
According to the further account, Reiss, who was an experienced man, immediately gathered what was up, and on the next day departed for Holland, where he visited a friend, leaving with him a copy of his famous letter. Then he departed for Switzerland – where he was murdered. According to le Jour, the G.P.U. agent who left for Russia has not been heard of since. The other agent received instructions to come to Moscow immediately, and had even bought his ticket, but at the last moment decided not to go. He remains in Paris under the protection of the French police.
 

Makes Complaint of Double-Cross
As for Grosovskaya, the article implies that she might not have left France voluntarily. Le Jour reports a conversation she is alleged to have had with Soviet diplomats in which she complained that they had not kept their promise to her – not to have her involved in the case. They reassured her. She is also reported to have been considerably disturbed over the fact that she had received no word from her husband, who had fled to Moscow several weeks before.
The editors of the Russian Bulletin (No. 62–63) cite the following facts relating to the activities of one Beletsky, G.P.U. agent masquerading as Soviet trade representative in Paris: It was Beletsky who issued instructions to Gertrude Schildach, one of Reiss’s assassins. Not trusting her fully, he had her shadowed. He not only instructed Schildach to take an apartment with Rossi, the actual killer, in a hotel, but visited them there a few days prior to the assassination. It was he who gave Schildach and Rossi a box of poisoned candy intended for Reiss, his wife and child. The editors further declare that there are any number’ of witnesses available to testify concerning Beletsky’s activity. For example, a German emigré F., a woman, broke with Beletsky and Co. after the murder of Reiss. Beletsky came to her rooms and threatened that unless she immediately left for Moscow she would suffer the same fate as Reiss.
 




New Crisis in Soviet Economy
There is a clear connection between the current reign of terror and the economic difficulties in which Stalin’s regime of self-proclaimed “victorious socialism” finds itself at the beginning of the Third Five Year Plan. Thousands of technicians, engineers and plant administrators are being made scapegoats for failings which are inherent in the Stalinist management and operation of Soviet industries.
Soviet railways, long a weak spot in industrial life, are again in serious straits, The basic equipment of the railways, like that of the majority of vital plants, has been seriously undermined in the reckless drive for records. Despite vast sums poured into transportation in recent years under the direction of L.M. Kaganovich, the railroads are functioning poorly. Wrecks and accidents show no signs of decreasing. Car loadings have been dropping at an alarming rate, thus nullifying the recent “successes” in metallurgy and mining.
In the latter industries, production has been temporarily restored to the levels attained towards the end of 1935, at the beginning of Stakhanovism. For example, coal production in the Donbas region is averaging 225,000 tons per day (daily production in December 1935 – 229,000) as against the previous levels of below 200.000 tons daily. But the additional coal is simply piling up at the mines.
 

Coal Stocks Pile Up at Pits
So grave is the situation that Pravda on January 15, devoted to the First Session of the Supreme Council, had to allot space to the “disgraceful condition” of the Donbas railways. Pravda reports that in the first ten days of January the coal stocks at the mine pits “more than doubled.” “More than 600,000 tons of coal” piled up, and the reserve keeps increasing. Meanwhile, according to Pravda,
“The North Donetz and South Donetz railways fall behind, failing to load daily from 25 to 30 thousand tons ... On the North Donetz.Railway only one-half of the trains start on schedule and only one-third keep to the schedule.”
This affects not only the work of the coal mines but of other plants as well, in particular the metallurgy industry. “Tens of thousands tons of production remain lying in metallurgical and other plants of the Donbas for the same reason.” (Pravda, January 15)
Pravda for Jan. 24 devotes its leading article to the railways crisis. Here is the opening paragraph:
“The work of the railway transport has steadily worsened in the recent period. The magnificent position which the railwaymen occupied in, the summer of 1937 has now been lost by them. Daily, the transport system fails to fulfil the plan by 10 to 20 per cent. The most important freight for the life of the country – metal, oil, and bread – is being held up for long periods at the key stations. The debt of the transport system to the country is growing with every passing day.”
Continues Pravda: “The railwaymen have no objective, external reasons whatsoever for the lag.” The solution for the difficulty is: “To raise the discipline among the railwaymen,” in other words, to pile repressions upon repressions. That is the only solution Stalin has to offer. The condition of the transport is especially grave in views of the fact that the country’s resources are being strained to match the armament race for the coming conflict.
 

The Crisis in Spring Sowing
Despite the Stalinist boasts of a record crop last year and forecasts of even a greater crop in the coming season, it is quite apparent that serious difficulties are being encountered in agriculture, especially in spring sowing. Seeds have not been prepared; the tractors are not ready; the plan is not being fulfilled. Emergency measures are being resorted to. “Volunteer” brigades are being recruited to go into the country and repair the tractors. The entire Komsomol (Young Communist League) has been mobilized to fulfill the plan in repairing tractors and “prepare the sowing campaign.”
On January 18 Eikhe, the new Commissar for Agriculture, delivered a report on the “Plan for 1938 in Agriculture” at a plenary session of the Central Committee of the C.P.S.U. He painted a dismal picture of the conditions in agriculture. His report might as well have been entitled “the work of wreckers in the agricultural organs.” “Wreckers” are to blame for everything. In the meantime, according to Eikhe, the plan for repairing tractors has been fulfilled only 30 per cent. Gasoline supplies are lacking, seed has not been prepared. (Pravda, January 22)
Dispatches appearing in the Soviet press present even a more dismal picture. In the Ukraine (Chernigov) tractors are not being repaired. In 14 tractor stations there are no head mechanics. (Pravda, January 19) In the Maryansk region in Kuban, at the tractor station there, on January 1, out of 26 tractors requiring major repairs only 8 were ready; out of 30 tractors requiring “average” repairs only 10 were ready. In Maryansk, 1,400 tons of gasoline were needed, only 6 tons were stored. In Novo-Myshastovsk out of 1,860 tons needed, only 71 tons were ready. (Pravda, January 17) The Georgievsk tractor station (Ordjonikidze province) had not produced a single tractor by January 1. (Pravda, January 24) Things are bad in Bashkiria and worse in Tadjikistan. The Commissar for Agriculture in the latter region, Selivanov, is “not to be trusted.”
In its leading article on January 3, Pravda declared:
“On December 20, 1937, the plan for repairing tractors had been fulfilled only 13 per cent for the Union as a whole. In point of fact, the plan for the fourth quarter has collapsed.”
 

Havoc Caused by Purge
The havoc caused by the purge accounts in part for this, condition. Thus Pravda (January 24) reports that in Bashkiria alone for the last three months 37 agricultural heads and 46 directors of tractor stations have been removed, together with their deputies and “scores of mechanics.” Eikhe reported that out of 200 tractor stations in White Russia only 144 had directors. He added: “We have the same picture in Omsk, Orenburg, Sverdlovsk and a number of other regions.” (Pravda, January 22.) Remedy? It is provided in the leading editorial of the same issue of Pravda which declared that in the recent order of the Central Committee to “suspend” the purge, the party has “a new sharp weapon against the enemies of the people.”
 

Purge in the Commissariat of Heavy Industry
Among those made scapegoats for the latest economic crisis were all three deputies of Lazar Kaganovich, Commissar for Heavy Industry (who replaced – on August 22, 1937 – the purged Mezhlauk, successor of the deceased Ordjonikidze). In the early part of January, they all “disappeared.” Among them was Zavenyagin, candidate to the Central Committee, decorated with the highest orders for successful construction of the Magnitogorsk combine and director of Magnitogorsk plants, and appointed as deputy by Kaganovich himself on September 17, 1937. The fate of Zavenyagin and his colleagues became known when Pravda and Izvestia for January 8 printed terse notices of the appointment of three new deputies: Butenko, Kuzmin and Pervukhin.
 




Stalin’s “Elections” – A Cover for Wilder Purges
The Praesidium of’ the All-Russian Central Executive Committee has set June as the date for the elections to the Supreme Council of the R.S.F.S.R. These Soviet “elections” will follow immediately upon the termination of party elections now in progress. Their task, like that of all of Stalin’s elections, is to extend the purge. The instructions issued in connection with the coming elections are very explicit. We cite a key paragraph from the decree issued by the joint plenum of the Moscow Central Committee and Moscow Regional Committee:
“The conduct and preparation of the elections to the Supreme Council of the R.S.F.S.R. must aid in the successful solution of all political and economic tasks confronting the toilers of the city of Moscow and of the Moscow region, in raising the revolutionary vigilance of all the toilers in the struggle against the rabid enemies of the people, the Trotskyite-Bukharinite agents of foreign espionage services.” (Pravda, April 22.)
The meaning of these ominous words is plain enough. More arrests. More executions. More trials – both secret and “public.” Judging from the past procedure, it can be stated with virtual certainty that the present wave of arrests will reach its crest early in June, in the days immediately preceding the elections, and that shortly after the elections the next trials will be staged.
 

The Party Purge
Meanwhile, the purge of the party continues its course in Krasnoyarsk, in the 15 party organizations that have reported the result of the elections, nine have elected “young Communists who are holding party posts for the first time.” In Leningrad, 370 units have thus far reported new party committees, new secretaries and organizers. In Stalino out of 578 functionaries elected “about one half” are reported as holding posts for the first time; out of 407 secretaries and organizers just elected, 134 are reported as newcomers.
The campaign around this latest party purge is identical in tone with the preparations for the coming “Soviet elections.” Pravda boasts that an enormous interest is being evinced in the party elections by “non-party workers and peasants, by millions of non-party Bolsheviks who are firmly united with the party in the joint struggle for communism.” Nor does Pravda mince words as to the actual significance of what is taking place:
“The questions occupying the center of attention are the questions of vigilance, of the struggle against the Trotskyite-Bukharinite scum, of the ideological arming of the communists ... All efforts of the party organizations must be directed toward liquidating the consequences of wrecking, rooting out the enemy remnants, and fighting to fulfill the state plans.” (Pravda, April 19.)
Appointment of new deputies indicates a purge in the following departments: Commissariat of Justice (under Vyshinsky); Commissariat of Water Transport (under Yezhov); Commissariat of Heavy Industry (under L. Kaganovich); Commissariat of Agriculture (under Eike).
 

Shortage of Necessities
While the Trial of 21 was in progress, and almost at the same time as Zelenski was testifying (and confessing) how he had kept the shelves of Soviet stores empty of such necessities as butter, salt, sugar, soap etc., the Stalinist authorities were conducting an investigation of the trade network. Toward the end of April, Pravda carried a carefully worded report of this investigation, a section of which we reproduce:
“In March 1938 the investigation covered 5,090 stores of the state trade network. About 10 per cent had no soap, and no makhorka (low grade tobacco); 4 per cent were suffering from lapses in the sale of matches; 5 per cent of the stores were without salt. The conditions in the stores of the consumers’ co-operatives were even worse. Out of 2,150 stores investigated in March, 11.4 per cent suffered from lapses in the trade with salt; from 3 to 7 per cent of the stores were not always able to satisfy the demand for matches, sugar, makhorka and soap.” (Pravda, April 21)
The “wreckers” had been shot but the population is still without primary necessities. Who is responsible? You know the answer. Pravda insists that this condition is obviously due to fact that the trade network has not been completely purged of “wreckers.”
 




Crisis in the Soviet Armed Forces
An extensive article on the critical condition of the Soviet armed forces resulting from Stalin’s decimation of the commanding personnel, is contained in the Sotsialisticheski Vestnik, Menshevik organ published in Paris, of March 8, 1938. The general staff of the Red Army has been wiped out. Marshal Tukhachevsky and seven members of the general staff were doomed by a tribunal of eight men: Alksnis, one of Voroshilov’s four deputies, head of the Air Corps; Shaposhnikov, head of the general staff; five commanders of military districts: Budenny, Bluecher, Belov, Dybenko and Kashirin and the commander of the Cossack cavalry corps, Goriachev. What has been the fate of the “judges”?
All of them – with the sole exception of Kashirin – were designated as candidates to the Supreme Council. All of them, with the exception of Alksnis, were “elected” deputies, and almost all of them have already been liquidated. Kashirin disappeared last autumn. Alksnis was removed on the eve of the elections. Dybenko, commander of the Leningrad District, and Belov, commander of the White Russian district, both disappeared after the elections, together with Kuibyshev, commander of the Trans-Caucasian district. Budenny and Bluecher have been under a cloud. Their names were not even mentioned in the dispatches issued in connection with the twentieth anniversary of the Red Army. To the above names should be added that of Velikanov, commander of the Trans-Baikal district who was removed after the elections. The same fate was suffered by Mezis, member of the White Russian Military Council, Ozolin (Kharkov), and Apse (Trans-Caucasia). Marshal Yegorov, Tukhachevsky’s successor who was elected deputy to the Supreme Council, has disappeared, together with thousands of other army commanders.
 

Admirals Given Liquidation Order
The top personnel of the Navy has been even more seriously affected. Orlov, one of the four vice-commissars of defense and head of the navy, was removed last fall. His successor, Victorov, elected deputy to the Supreme Council, likewise disappeared. Ludri, head of the naval academy, and Sivkov, commander of the Baltic fleet since January 1937, have also turned out to be “fascist hirelings.” Kireyev, appointed to command the Pacific fleet, was nominated as deputy to the Supreme Council but never elected. Kozhanov, commander of the Baltic fleet, disappeared last October and was replaced by Smirnov-Sverlovsky, who did not last long even though he was “elected” deputy. The same fate was suffered by Dushenov, head of the Northern fleet.
Out of 22 high ranking officers in the army and navy who were elected last December to the Supreme Council, eight have already turned out to be “enemies of the people.”
So grave is the situation that, as Vestnik points out, no troops were permitted to parade on the twentieth anniversary of the Red Army.
* * *

Recent Developments in the Soviet Union
On March 30, the Central Committee issued instructions for the re-election of all the leading organs of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. The elections are to be held in the period between April 1 and June 15. They will be “secret” – except for the posts of secretaries and the highest bodies such as presidiums of locals and districts. When the “returns” come in, the full scope of this latest purge in the party, camouflaged as an election, will become evident.
* * *
Pravda of March 23 comes out in favor of restoring corporal punishment in schools.
* * *
The term “ukase,” notorious under the Czars, has been restored to good standing by Stalin. The Supreme Council is now issuing “ukases.” The regime still eschews the use of the title “General.”
* * *
The appointment of new deputies indicates purges in the following departments: Soviet Control Commission, State Planning Commission, Commissariat of Water Transport, Commissariat of Justice and the Northern Sea Route administration. (Pravda, March 28 and 29)
* * *
Dispatch from Gorki: “In the Molotov automotive plant, 1,777 machines are awaiting shipment owing to the failure of the railroad A considerable number of the machines are standing in a yard flooded with water. In the next few days it will be impossible to pull them out of the mud.” (Pravda, March 28)
 




Purge in the Council of People’s Commissars
On March 28 the Council of People’s Commissars elected only a few weeks before (in January) convened in its regular session with Molotov in the chair. The following Commissars received “warnings”: M. Brugkin, Commissar for Mechanical Construction; M. Shestakov, Commissar for Light Industry; A. Gilinsky, Commissar for Food Industry; A. Zverev, Commissar for Finance, M. Boldyrev, Commissar for Public Health. Among those who appeared before the Council to report was Otto Schmidt head of the Northern Sea Route Administration who was also severely “criticized.” The “warning” to. Schmidt, incidentally, has been repeated since then in the press, and his removal is only a matter of time.
Immediately after the session, terse reports appeared in the press revealing the consummation of the purge in two departments, those of Land Transport and of Water Transport.
The Commissar for Water Transport, N.I. Pakhfimov, has been removed from his post, and replaced by N. Yezhov who how holds two posts (Commissar for Internal Affairs and Commissar for Water Transport). The appointment of Yezhov obviously implies such an intensification of the purge in the Water Transport Commissariat as will leave not a trace of the former administration.
Parkhomov, the purged Commissar, who has undoubtedly been arrested, was one of the seven of Stalin’s “old line Bolsheviks” who had escaped the preceding purge. Of the original pillars of the Stalin administration only six now remain in the Council: V.M. Molotov, K. Voroshilov, Vlas Chubar, M. Litvinov, L. Kaganovich and A. Mikoyan.
The downfall of Bakulin, Commissar for Land Transport, has been expected for some time because of the critical condition of Soviet railways, for which, of course, he is made the scapegoat.
Bakulin’s successor is L. Kaganovich who now holds that post in addition to being the Commissar for Heavy Industry. The policy of combining the departments will apparently be pursued in the future.
* * *
Raskolnikov, the Soviet Ambassador to Sofia has been “recalled.”
Dispatches from Moscow for April 10 announce a purge in the Commissariat of Agriculture in the autonomous Tartar republic. Seven functionaries have been shot for “sabotage and adherence to the counter-revolutionary organization of Trotskyites and Rights.”
* * *

The Destruction of the C.P.S.U.
In a dispatch to the New York Times (April 23, 1938), Denny comments on the elimination of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union as a political power in Stalin’s Russia, in pursuance of Stalin’s plan to intrench himself as a “legal” dictator.
The Soviet press, in the campaign that is being waged around the current “party elections,” reveals that in 1937 more thaqn 40 per cent of the party functionaries in the key Moscow and Leningrad organizations had been replaced by “new cadres,” i.e,, by people who had never held party positions before. It goes without saying that the same process was extended to party units all over the country. If 40 percent of the Stalinist leading cadres were removed in 1937, what will happen when the “elections” are over in 1938?
The very fact that the G.P.U. permitted Denny publicly to announce the demise of the C.P.S.U. as a political factor in Russia is ample enough proof that it is Stalin’s intention to complete the job of “renewing the leadership,” i.e., completely to destroy even the fiction of the party in 1938.
The resolutions passed by party units, higher party bodies etc. all call for the intensification of the campaign to root out the remaining “vestiges of the counter-revolutionary Fascist spies and wreckers in the party.”
* * *

Sidelights on Party “Elections”
A zealous functionary in Bashkiria overfulfills his directives: “Seyfullin, secretary of the Yanaulsk regional committee of the party, came out at the conference with an anti-party declaration, calling all of the members of the plenum of his regional committee ‘enemies of the people.’ Unfortunately, such a speech at the conference met with no rebuff whatever. Comrade Zalikin, secretary of the Bashkir provincial committee, who directed the conference, advised Seyfullin to remove all members of the plenum of the regional committee from leadership, and to draw in other communists to replace them ...” (Pravda, April 11)
* * *
In the Ural machine plant the party election was opened with dances. “The meeting was called for 7 P.M., but at 8 o’clock only 17 candidates and 9 party members were present. Anybody not too lazy was able to gain entry to the hall. There was no check of party documents. The place was cold and uncomfortable. Everybody sat in their coats and hats ... The report of the secretary of the party committee comrade Vetrov, was apolitical and full of gross mistakes. Vetrov literally devoted only half a minute to the decisions of the January plenum of the Central Committee of the C.P.S.U. and their fulfillment ...” (Pravda, April 13)
* * *
The editors of the Daily Worker charge Denny with an attempt to refurbish “the old canard about Joseph Stalin setting himself up as a ‘dictator’.” And to disprove Denny they proudly refer to the party elections! Says the Daily Worker: “And when does Mr. Denny attempt this bit of slander? Just when the Communist Party carries out the most democratic elections for its officers of every category up to the very highest.” (April 25)
 




The Purge in Progress
The current blood purge bids fair to surpass all those that preceded. Hardly an issue of Pravda appears without an attack on some department. The “criticism” of the Northern Sea Route Administration headed by Prof. Otto Schmidt has attracted most attention abroad. But it is only one of the departments under fire. In recent days the Soviet press has carried ominous charges against the Commissariat of Transportation, the People’s Commissar for Agriculture in White Russia, the Presidium of the Moscow Soviet, its Chairman, H. Sidorov, and its secretary, Dedkov, etc.
The appointment of two new deputy Commissars for Heavy Industry, M.I. Tselischev and P.P. Kucherenko, which is reported in Pravda for March 20, denotes still another purge in that department – for the third time since last October!
According to the leading article in the same issue of Pravda, 132,000 employees in the trade network have been “brought up on charges for alleged embezzlement and dissipation.”
 

The Purge in the Red Army
From top to bottom the Red Army has been decimated by the purge. As was to be expected, the Young Communist League in the army has been hardest hit. So many Y.C.L. units in the regiments have been left without bureau heads and secretaries that the Central Committee of the party and the Central Committee of the Komsomol have abolished the old restriction that only those who have been party members for at least two years were eligible for posts as secretaries of regimental bureaus of the Y.C.L. Says Pravda. “Members and candidates of the C.P.S.U., regardless of how long they have been in the party, are eligible for the post of secretary of the bureaus of the Y.C.L. and in exceptional cases, even those Y.C.L.ers who are not members of the party.” (Pravda, March 19.)
The same leading article goes on to add that another restriction has likewise been abolished. Hitherto “political representatives” in the Army had to be party members. “Henceforth, according to the decision of the C.C. of the C.P.S.U., the most tested and politically qualified Y.C.L.ers are to be drawn into the political organs of the Red Army as deputies or assistants of the political directors.”
 

The Crisis in Transportation
We have already reported the grave condition of Soviet railways. Numerous items in the official press indicate that thero has been no improvement in this field. Wte cite a few instances.
On Feb. 8, Pravda reported that 2,800 automobiles were left standing in the yard of the Gorki automobile plant. On March 17, in the Gorki yard 2,141 cars remained standing. “Some of them are becoming spoiled, others are half-covered with snow and ice ... The yard where the finished machines are left standing for months is guarded poorly. Various parts are being stolen from the machines.” (Pravda, March 18. Our emphasis)
Flood threatens on the shores of the rivers Volga, Kama, Viatka, Beloya and others in the Tartar Republic, where valuable freight has been stored: 128,000 tons of grain, 13,149 tons of hay belonging to the state and unspecified quantities of kolkhoz hay, together with car-loads of sugar, salt, lumber, cement, alabaster, brick, etc. At the single station of Sosnovka, on the shores of the Viatka river 1,960 cars of lumber are stranded. The same situation exists on the river Sura. Meanwhile the railways are unable to move this freight. Especially criticized for “inactivity” is the administration of the Kazan railway line. (Pravda, March 19)
Stalin’s remedy: more executions among the railway personnel.
 




Stalin Intensifies Purge
After each of the previous trials, the blood purge was intensified. The same procedure is being followed as an aftermath of the most recent Moscow frame-up. Reports of executions all over Russia are again appearing in the press.
Several trials are in preparation. The most prominent names mentioned in this connection are: Antonov-Ovseyenko, Rudzutak, Mezhlauk, Bubnov, Krylenko, Kaminsky, Lubimov, Bogomolov, Yurenev, Davtyan, Yakubovich, Karsky, Asmus and Rosenberg.
* * *
Apart from Voroshilov, Budenny is the only well-known army leader who has not yet fallen into disgrace. Bluecher’s name has not appeared in the press in recent weeks. Marshal Yegorov has been arrested, together with the head of his staff, General Zhukov.
So many prominent Red Army men have been seized by the G.P.U. that it is possible another trial involving only the military personnel will be staged. Such a trial – which would doubtless be held behind “closed doors” – would involve: Marshal Yegorov, Zhukov (head of Yegorov’s staff), Gorbachev (member of the Military Council of Defense), Alksnis (head of the Air Force), Orlov (head of the Navy), Generals Dybenko, Belov, Rybalko and others.
* * *
The arrest of Marshal Yegorov is the first indication that Stalin’s purge has already extended into the ranks of the deputies recently elected to the Supreme Council. Yegorov was a full-fledged deputy, and as such “immune” from arrest except by vote of the Presidium, as provided for by the Stalin “Constitution.” (There has been considerable speculation as to the precise functions of the Presidium. Apparently, one of its most important duties is to provide a cover, for Yezhov’s handiwork.) No such vote of the Presidium has been made public, although several deputies have already been arrested.
 

Sidelights on the Last Frame-Up
In the campaign conducted around previous trials, a prominent part was played by “resolutions” passed at “mass meetings” which were given prominent display. Characteristic of these resolutions in the past has been the invariable pledge: to “make good” the damage done by the wreckers, and to over-fulfill the plan. The tone of the resolutions revolving around ths frame-up of Bukharin-Rykov et al. has been strikingly different. No mention is made of improving the functioning of plants, collective farms, tractor stations, etc. Instead, the resolutions are filled with denunciations of “additional” acts of diversion, wrecking and so on, allegedly perpetrated by the “plotters,” and to which they did not confess but of which they were nevertheless guilty. We cite a few instances from a single issue of Pravda:
“The enemies of the people also sought to wreck the locomotive and freight car repair plant at Tbilissi. They worsened the working conditions of the workers, disrupted the supply of materials to the plant, sought to arouse dissatisfaction among the workers.” (Pravda, March 8)
“The gang of bandits also operated in our factory. The bandits and wreckers caused a tie-up of capital investments, bought equipment for hundreds of thousands of rubles that was absolutely worthless and useless in the plant, hindered the expansion of the plant, sought to liquidate the large nail-works, broke down the boiler-works No. 2, left the factory without fuel and so on.” (Idem. Resolution of the Krasnaya Etna plant at Gorki)
“The Trotskyite-Bukharinite bandits also operated in the Uglich district. They have caused great injury to our socialist economy. The vile enemies liquidated the collective farms Svoboda and Zuevo, deprived the collective farmers of land given them in perpetuity, left the cattle in the collective without feed, ploughed over fields and pasture-lands. In 1930 alone they destroyed 5,470 head of horned cattle, 11,616 pigs and sheep, 612 horses. They also wrecked the trade network, disrupted the building of schools in the village of Platunov, Orzine and elsewhere. It is impossible to enumerate the crimes of these scoundrels.” (Idem. Resolution of a “Meeting of Workers, Collective Farmers, and Employees of the City of Uglich and Uglich District in the Yaroslav Province”)
* * *
As testified to in the trial, Trotsky received a “subsidy” of 250,000 marks from Germany precisely during the years when German marks were so inflated as to be virtually worthless. They were sold in the streets of New York, among other things, at the rate of 100,000 marks for 5 cents. Remember?
 

Vyshinsky on Zinoviev in 1925
Before he became prosecutor for Stalin, Vyshinsky wrote a book: Sketches in the History of Communism. It contains a chapter on the “Third International” with innumerable servile quotations from Zinoviev, Bukharin and other “spies, moral degenerates, swine, foxes, etc.”
We cite from the book:
“From the very first day of the war, the revolutionary section of the Marxists led by Lenin, Zinoviev and Rosa Luxemburg conducted an energetic campaign against the war, against the conciliationism of the Second International, and exposed all of the treachery of the leaders who had betrayed Marxism.” (Sketches in the History of Communism, Vol. II, p. 336, Moscow 1925)
 




Drive Against Foreigners Intensified
The lag in Soviet industry had led to the belief that foreign specialists might be recalled, but thus far there has been nothing to indicate any change in the attitude toward foreigners.
Expulsion of Czechoslovak citizens has assumed such proportions that the Czechoslovak legation had to convert part of its quarters into a dormitory for travellers in transit. The Paris press reports that about 60 Czechs have been recently placed under arrest. The number of Germans arrested has reached 500, according to the same sources. In the latter part of 1937, 3,000 Greeks, most of them naturalized Soviet citizens, were arrested.
At Moscow, 48 technicians were recently placed under arrest in a single house. Their wives and children, numbering about 100, were ordered to prepare for departure to an unknown destination. On Dec. 28, the police came in trucks and took them away. It seems to have become an established practice to send relatives of arrested persons to regions far distant from the big cities.
Their apartments, incidentally, are not placed at the disposition of the public, despite the acute housing shortage, but remain in the hands of the G.P.U., which thus provides for its own members.
 

Another Mystery?
Everyone in any way connected with recording the death of Ordjonikidze, Commissar of Heavy Industry, who allegedly died at his home on Feb. 18, 1937, has either disappeared or been arrested.
According to reports as yet unconfirmed, the purge reached inside the Kremlin walls and carried off two of the leading physicians in charge of the Kremlin hospitals: Drs. Levine (director of the hospital), Mertz, and a third unnamed.
These doctors had signed the statement issued by G.N. Kaminsky, then Commissar of Health, on Ordjonikidze’s death. Kaminsky was removed from his post in March. Prof. Pletnev, who reputedly refused to sign the statement, is believed to be under arrest.
Ordjonikidze was stated to have died of heart failure due to overstrain. There was a delay of almost twenty-four hours between the time of his death and the public announcement of it.
 

The Membership “Drive” of the C.P.S.U.
As an integral part of his Second Five Year Plan, Stalin ordered a new purge in the party. On December 10, 1,932, the Central Committee decreed the “cleansing”, and at the same time closed the membership books. Three years later (on December 25, 1935) the Central Committee voted in favor of reopening the lists, and accepting applications of new candidates and members. However, it was only one year later on November 1, 1936, that official instruction to this effect was forthcoming.
The party had apparently been made “safe” for new members – after a purge of four years’ duration which was followed by a “check-up of documents” and the “issuance of new books”, and climaxed by the Moscow frame-ups and the blood purge of unprecedented proportions. The most conservative estimate of the number of party members involved in this entire (five-year) operation would be in the neighborhood of a million.
In its leading article for December 22, 1937, Pravda sums up, the achievements of the period as follows:
“Rigid individual selection has helped the party for the past year to fill its ranks with thousands of advanced workers, kolkhozniki, and the best people from among the Soviet intelligentsia. In the various enterprises in Moscow and Leningrad, the basic party organizations have added to their ranks a considerable number of new communists from among the best Stakhanovists, men known to the whole country. All told, since the reopening of applications into the party, there have been accepted, according to preliminary figures, 46,289 individuals as candidates, and 51,675 as members of the C.P.S.U. Of this number, the district and city committees have approved 27,785 as candidates and 33,720 as party members.”
But while apparently expressing satisfaction with the general state of affairs, Pravda goes on to comment sadly that in many party organizations “membership books are still closed, in point of fact”!
Since its leading editorial on the progress of the membership drive, Pravda has filled its columns with “danger signals.” The Railway and Stalin District Committees in Rostov-on-Don had not taken in a single new member for ten months. The Voroshilovsk party organization (embracing the largest chemical plants in the country) had accepted only seven applicants as candidates and the same number as members in a period of 9 months. (Pravda, Dec. 29) The Sevastopol party organization had accepted for the past half-year only fourteen men, among them three workers. The total number of sympathizers had “even” declined in the same period. (Pravda, Jan. 2) In the entire Archangel province, the number of sympathizers had increased by only 260. In certain regions there was a decrease. The number of acceptances had been decreasing from month to month and “in the last two months only seven were accepted in the entire province.” (Pravda, Jan. 3)
The explanation for this “lag” is simple enough. Every new applicant must be recommended by two party members in good standing. And prospective sponsors, mindful of what has happened in the past, are evidently very loth to incur the risk of recommending anybody at all – for fear that they might be sponsoring an “enemy of the people.”
 

Bungle-Troyanovsy vs. The N. Y. Times
and Stalin’s Pravda – on Illiteracy
Ambassador Troyanovsky has engaged the editors of the N.Y. Times in a spirited discussion on the “level of illiteracy” in the U.S.S.R. The editorial commentator of the Times has had the temerity to estimate that the number of illiterate persons in the Soviet Union composes “perhaps 25%” of the population. Troyanovsky thereupon charges that this is part of a campaign of defamation against Stalin carried on by the champion of “obscurant Tsarist autocracy” who poses as a commentator for the said Times. (N.Y. Times, Sunday, Jan. 16)
Unbeknown to the contending parties (and to itself), Pravda has added a significant item to the discussion. On Jan. 3rd, a special correspondent of Pravda, one Khodakov sent a wire dispatch from the thriving city of Osh, which has a silk plant employing more than 1,000 women. According to this correspondent, the women workers in this silk plant “become indignant when they talk about the work in the domain of liquidating illiteracy.” And apparently with good reason. For, continues Khodakov, “they have been attending the study circles (of the society for liquidating illiteracy) for two and three years but the instruction is so poor that the women have not yet learned how to read.” The conclusion which Pravda’s correspondent draws might prove illuminating, especially to Troyanovsky. Here it is: “It is quite self-evident that in the Soviet and party apparatus of the city of Osh there still remains a goodly number of alien and enemy elements.” (Pravda, Jan. 3, 1937)
All of which leads us to conclude that Troyanovsky bungled again. Quite obviously, it was his duty not to challenge the estimate of the N.Y. Times but rather to point out that the large number of illiterates was due to “Trotskyite-Boukharinite-Fascist” wrecking, sabotage, etc. etc.
 




Echoes of Stalin’s Fake Elections
Stalin’s plebiscite met with polite but pointed razzing in the editorial pages of the world capitalist (“democratic”) press. The fraud was so brazen and crude that the bourgeois editors stood only to gain by understatement. It goes without saying that they did not let the opportunity slip to cover Marxism in general and Bolshevism in particular with the muck that Stalin pumps out of Moscow.
The noteworthy thing is that the French partners of Stalin in the People’s Front treachery have finally unbuttoned their lips. Even Le Populaire broke on this occasion its non-aggression policy toward Stalin, dropping its pretext of “diplomatic consideration” to criticize the electoral frame-up. The French social patriots had covered Stalin’s judicial frame-ups with silence. Now that it is no longer expedient (or possible) to keep mum, Populaire virtuously declares that Stalinism has “succeeded quite convincingly in demonstrating to the populace the grave personal risk every citizen incurs by adhering to the opposition.”
They dare even to make reference (somewhat belatedly) to the frame-ups. Says Populaire:
“The January trial of the so-called ‘parallel center’ (i.e., Radek-Piatakov trial – (J.G.W.); the June execution of Tukhachevsky and seven other generals, the purge in the party, the trade unions, the Komsomol, the Comintern, the administration, the journalistic and literary circles; the havoc wrought in the so-called ‘federated’ republics – all this nips in the bud the very possibility of an opposition’s crystallizing.”
Concludes the Populaire:
“... the system of Soviet (read, Stalinist) elections has nothing in common with democracy despite the fact that the Soviet government has had the gall to declare its electoral law ‘the most democratic in the world.’”
Now that they have broken the negotiations for unity with the C.P., the French social-patriots declare that they “cannot but view with disparagement the system of rule which is a complete denial of democratic principles.”
Naturally, this cannot but widen the breach between Blum & Co. and Stalin-G.P.U.-Thorez & Co.
 

100 Per Cent for Stalin
The Stalinski electoral, district in which Stalin himself chose to run was in the nature of things destined to set the record in getting out the vote. Nothing less than 100 per cent would do! “When the zealous officials completed the count of the ballots, they were slightly embarrassed to discover that Stalin had been elected by more than 100 per-cent. The official explanation is that voters in, other districts seeking the “great honor” of voting for the beloved butcher flocked to the Stalinski district, where apparently the vote was so secret that ballots could be cast even by those who were not registered there.
 

Stalinist Constitution Work of “Spies” Etc.
In February 1935 a Constitutional Commission of 29 was appointed to draft the Stalin Constitution. Of these “Founding-Fathers,” five have been officially reported shot as “enemies of the people;” one (Cherviakov) committed suicide; two are presumably in prison (Radek, tried and sentenced; Bukharin, reported to have been sentenced and probably dead); one is reported a virtual prisoner (Litvinov); one is under a cloud (Petrovsky); nine are “missing” – leaving still to be accounted for, eight others (Molotov, Voroshilov, L. Kaganovich, Zhdanov, Kalinin, Mikoyan, Chibar, and Vishinsky) plus, of course, Stalin.
In other words, the notorious Stalin Constitution was drafted by a Commission composed two-thirds of Germano-Japanese-Fascist-Trotskyite-Bukharinist etc. spies, wreckers, poisoners, restorers of capitalism, etc – that is, if you believe Stalin.
 

Fate of Austrian Revolutionists in U.S.S.R.
Early in 1934 the heroic little army of 600 Austrian socialists, members of the Schutzbund, went to the U.S.S.R. In a feature article for December 15, the Daily Herald reports that “The men who went to Russia full of enthusiasm are now trickling back in a steady flow anxious to go home to Austria where prison awaits them.” They are reported as leaving “of their own choice.” The Daily Herald also reports that “at least 10 Austrian Socialists are in prison” in the city of Kharkov.
 

“Cannon Balls, Cannon Balls, Jingle All Around!”
The League of Nations adds to the prevailing spirit of “peace and good will on earth” (hailed so graciously by the Daily Worker) by issuing its Armaments Year Book for 1937. The world military expenditure which in 1932 was estimated at 4,300,000,000 gold dollars reached in 1937 the staggering total of 7,100,000,000 gold dollars – with still greater expenditures in store. These figures are based on “official” budgets only, i.e., are far below the actual amounts invested in the impending war. The admitted amount is almost three times as much as the world military expenditure in 1913, on the eve of the first world slaughter. Europe’s share is approximately two-thirds of this total. The plans of the imperialists in the sphere of war preparations may be gathered from the armament budget of “democratic” Britain which calls for:



1936–7


 


£188 million




1937–8


£278 million




1938–9


£340 million



In 1913–14, Britain’s war budget was £77 million.
Browder and Co. strangely forgot to extend the greetings of the season to the greatest beneficiaries of Santa Claus, (and the G.P.U.).
 




Polish C.P. Purged by Stalin
The Bulletin of the Russian Opposition (No. 60–61) reports that the most prominent members of the Central Committee and the Political Bureau of the Polish C.P. have been placed under arrest in Moscow: S. Prukhniak, Bronkovski, Y. Ryng, Vera Koscheva, Genrikovski, Valetski, together with other well known Polish communists: Krayevski, S. Guberman, Jan Gempel, La-pinski, Bronik and Bruno Yassenski. There are also unverified rumors to the effect that the General Secretary of the Polish C.P., Lenski, has likewise been arrested.
 

Caste of Bank Book Owners Flourishes in the U.S.S.R.
Finansovaya Gazetta for Dec. 18, 1937, carries a significant item on the growth of the privileged caste in the U.S.S.R. Beginning with the Second Five Year Plan, and coincident with the introduction of Stakhanovism, there has been a marked growth of savings deposits, which have almost doubled in one year, from 2½ billion in 1936 to 4 1/3 billion rubles in 1937. (In Jan. 1933 the amount in savings accounts totalled 974.3 million rubles.) Of the total number of depositors (14 million) less than one-third are listed as “workers”. (Functionaries constitute 34.5%; Kolkhozniki – 22%.)
Says Finansovaya Gazetta:
“The notable thing is the growth of big depositors, these having savings accounts of 1,000 rubles and over. At the beginning of 1935 there were 436,000 such depositors; at the beginning of 1936 they numbered – 681,000; and on Jan. 1, 1937 – 1,053,000. Of these, 210,000 had over 3,000 rubles each.”
These statistics indicate not only an accelerated growth of “big depositors”, i.e., of the privileged caste, but an ever increasing disproportion between a tiny fraction of the population and the bulk of the masses. Taking the figures in the indefinite form given, and assuming that each of 201,000 depositors has only 3,000 rubles while the rest of the “big depositors” have only 1,000, these statistics show that 7% of the total number of depositors possess almost one-third of the total savings of the population. The disproportion is of course even greater in reality (millionaire kolkhozniks, “millionaire” artists, etc. etc,). It appears especially monstrous when compared with the average monthly wage of the unskilled: 110–115 rubles a month!
 

French C.P. Drives for Organic Unity
The Third Session of the Congress of the French C. P. which convened in Arles in the last week in December was devoted to a fervent appeal by Jacques Duelos for unity with the S.P. Said Duclos: “Don’t you know that the realization of unity will be decisive for the integral application of the measures inscribed in the programme of the People’s Front?”
Among the achievements of the People’s Front which Duclos forbore to mention in his passionate plea was the following: After a recent sit-down strike in the Gondolo biscuit factories had been “settled”, the workers upon returning to work found the factories occupied – this time by armed gangs of Fascists. From two to three hundred of these Fascists in the Gondolo plant as l’Humanité itself reports “refused to allow some 80 workers to enter, among whom there were those who had worked 15 and 16 years in the plant.” (L’Humanité, Dec. 28)
Elsewhere (as at Heaudebert à Nanterre) the bosses merely contented themselves with firing “numerous” strikers.
What do the Stalinists propose? The headline of l’Humanité screams: “The Government Must Put an End Immediately to This Scandal.”
And, indeed, instead of screaming separately as they do now the Socialists, if they listen to the ardent wooing of Duclos, will be able to scream for the Government to intervene in one “unity party” with the Stalinists.
 




Stalin Frame-ups Mask Bankruptcy of Regime
The inseparable connection between the Moscow frame-up trials and the external and internal difficulties of the Stalin regime stand fully revealed. Especially so with respect to the economic difficulties. When Stalin became the unquestioned ruler in the country (after he had smashed all opposition), and with the inception of planned economy under his direction, Soviet society entered into the phase of sensational trials. When Stalin’s regime encountered difficulties, it found from the outset only one solution: ever more repressive measures, ever more monstrous trials whose primary intention is to supply scapegoats for the crimes and failures of the ruling clique, thus aiming to discredit any opposition in order better to destroy it. As the difficulties of the regime increased the trials became more and more monstrous.
Never before has Soviet economy been in such straits. For the third time in less than two months, the official “plan” figures for coal production have been slashed. In December 1937 the control figures for coal production were set at 403.5 thousand tons per day. For the current month of March they have been fixed at 379.5 thousand tons as against 384.2 thousand tons for the end of February.
 

Statistics Carefully Doctored
On the surface, this latest cut appears so slight as hardly to merit attention. We should bear in mind, however, that Stalin’s statistics are carefully doctored to exaggerate all successes while minimizing all the failures. To understand the true significance of the cut one need only refer to the actual output of coal as officially reported in the press. The figures released for the first days in March admit a production below 350,000 tons a day as against a reported average daily output of some 360,000 tons for the previous month. This shows a drop of more than 10,000 tons, i.e., more than three times the drop in the control figures. If this figure is multiplied by the number of days in a month – not to mention the months in a year – it is obvious that there is a discrepancy of millions of tons between the current output and the requirements of the plan, as well as the current needs of industry as a whole. We need hardly comment on the disastrous effects on industry resulting from this continued drop in coal production.
Suffice it to say that proportionate drops for the first days of March have been reported in all key branches of industry (iron production – below 40,000 tons a day; steel – below 50,000, and so on).
Stalin finds its necessary to falsify his statistics just as he must continue with his efforts to frame-up the October revolution. As production drops, the control figures are slashed just the amount necessary to keep the ratio, between the actual output and the “plan” figures in the neighborhood of 90 percent. The Soviet citizen, if he scans the official reports, can see for himself that the plan is still being fulfilled “90 percent” if not more, while in reality it is not being fulfilled at all. In point of fact, for at least the last two years, which cover precisely the period of the latest Moscow frame-ups, the plan has been “fulfilled” in reverse. Instead of making progress, industry has been sliding backwards at ever-increasing speed despite the enormous sums of money poured into equipment, new plants, etc. and despite the inhuman speed-up of the workers.
 

Stalin Regime Wrecks Soviet Economy
This appalling condition only reflects how inimical to the existence of the Soviet Union the Stalinist regime lifts become. Stalinist methods have well-nigh wrecked the country’s basic industrial equipment. In the reckless drive for records, under the monstrous bureaucratic regime, machines and workers have been driven to the breaking point. The result – a crisis, an ever-deepening crisis.
Stalin issues no direct information as to the condition of things in the sphere of goods for mass production. However, if only from his trials, sufficient “indirect” data can be obtained concerning the real living conditions of the masses, just how “merry and joyous” life really is: wages remain at very low levels and are often unpaid for long periods; the purchasing power of the ruble is extremely low, reflecting the scarcity of such necessities as butter, vegetable oil, salt, sugar, and even bread, to say nothing of tobacco. Among the masses – widespread discontent, ever sharpening, ever-aggravated by the looming reality of the war. Are we perhaps exaggerating the picture? That is the picture drawn by Pravda itself, in a leading article of March 6. It is well worth reprinting in full, but we confine ourselves only to the following three paragraphs:
 

Pravda Paints a Revealing Picture
“The party and the Soviet government are improving, incessantly and from year to year, the material welfare of the toilers in the city and country. The filthy scum of the ‘Right Trotskyite’ block has done everything to worsen the material condition, if only of isolated layers of the toilers. The wrecker, spy and diversionist Grinko, has cynically testified in court that he and his henchmen tried to weaken the Soviet ruble; and that they held back the payment of wages to workers and employees. A practice was made of holding back wages in order to arouse dissatisfaction among the toilers. Today, in the light of the testimony of the defendants at the trial, both the lumber-worker in Archangel as well as the Sovkhoz worker in the Azov-Black Sea area – all those whose wages were frequently not paid in time during the past years but instead were maliciously held back, today they can all see for themselves who is responsible, for it and why it was done. Holding back the wages of certain groups of workers and employees was a link in the chain of provocations of the Right-Trotskyite conspirators, sowing dissatisfaction among the toilers ...
“The production of goods essential to the toilers is increasing without interruption in bur country. Zelensky and his criminal gang, in pursuance of directives of the ‘Right Trotskyite Bloc’ strained with all their might to keep the shelves of the village cooperatives empty. They did everything to prevent and retard the flood of goods intended for the village to satisfy the wants of the peasants. Thus, in the first quarter of 1936 many regions in the Kursk province received no sugar for weeks. Regions in the Leningrad province were left for a long time without makhorka (low grade tobacco). In the summer of 1936 a number of rural border regions of White Russia received no bread for a long time ...
 

Everyone Can Now See
“Today when the masks have been torn off the Fascist degenerates who sit in the prisoners’ dock, every man and woman in the collective farms, every working man and woman can see for themselves just who is responsible for the unsatisfactory functioning of the rural cooperatives, just who held back supplying the toilers with such goods as sugar, salt, makhorka which are available in surplus quantities in our country ... There they are – these beasts in human form, sitting in the prisoners’ dock, who wanted to deprive the population of these necessities of life.” (Pravda, March 6, 1938)
 




Sidelights on the Latest Moscow Frame-Up
Le Populaire, the official organ of the French Socialist Party, has finally broken the cowardly silence it has up to now maintained over the Moscow frame-ups. Recent issues have carried articles by Leon Blum and Theodore Dan (the latter, a Russian Menshevik leader, “implicated” by the defendants in the “plot”) condemning the trial of Bukharin, Rykhov et al. The silence in the past was motivated by “diplomatic considerations.” Now that the Second International itself is being framed by Stalin, and, far more important, now that the Franco-Soviet pact is about to be scrapped by the French imperialists, Blum and Co., no longer find it expedient to keep mum.
* * *
Stalin’s indictment charges that the “left” Communists not only conspired with the Left Social Revolutionaries in 1918 to arrest Lenin and overthrow the then Council of People’s Commissars, but also that they were “fully informed of the preparations for the murder of Mirbach and the July insurrection.” Among the leaders of the “left” Communists in 1918, were: E. Yaroslavsky, Alexandra Kollantai and the deceased Valerian V. Kuibyshev. If the “left” Communists were guilty as Stalin claims, Yaroslavsky and Kollantai should have been among those “indicted.” Yaroslavsky is very much alive, but instead of being in the prisoners’ dock, he is busy writing vile attacks against his former associates. Kollantai has been reported en route to Shanghai. It is true, Kuibyshev is dead, but Stalin does not scruple to place dead men on trial. It now serves Stalin’s purposes to exhume Kuibyshev’s corpse not as that of a “counter-revolutionist” but of a spotless Bolshevik, alleged to have been murdered by the “plotters.”
* * *

The “Murder” of Gorky
Among those implicated in the “murders” of Menzhinsky, Kuibyshev and Gorky (and Gorky’s son) are three physicians: Pletnev, Kazakov and Levin. The case against a fourth physician Vinogradov was “dropped in view of his demise.” The Soviet press follows the custom of printing a report signed by physicians whenever a Soviet dignitary dies. A study of the files of Pravda reveals the following facts:

No such medical report was printed when Menzhinskv died.
 
Kuibyshev’s death certificate was signed by 11 people, among them Dr. Levin. The report states that an autopsy was performed. Findings: heart failure. We append the signatories to this report, of whom only one man, Dr. Levin, is up on trial: Prof. A. A. Abrikosoy, G. Kaminsky (People’s Commissar of Health), I. Khodorovsky (head of Kremlin hospitals), Y. Levinson (deputy chief physician), M. Krol (head of the Kremlin clinic), B. Kogen (Krol’s deputy), A. Serebrov (head of G.P.U. Health Dept.), Dr. L. Levin, F. Abrikosova (Prof. Abrikosov’s assistant), Dr. Volkov, Dr. Lezhava. (Pravda, Jan. 26, 1935)
 
Gorky’s death certificate was signed by seven people, including Pletnev and Levin. The others (not on trial) were: G. Kaminsky (People’s Commissar of Health), I. Khodorovsky, Prof. G. Lang, M. Konchalovsky, and A. Speransky. All of them were present at an autopsy performed by Prof. N. V. Davydovsky, and all of them sighed the report of the autopsy: death due to tubercular lung condition. (Pravda, June 19, 1936)
 

The announcement of Gorky’s death was preceded in the press by the publication of a bulletin on his health, which appeared in Pravda on June 7 and was signed by I. Khodorovsky, Prof, G. Lang and Dr. L. Levin.
 




Stalin and Molotov on Bukharin – in 1926
In 1925, when Stalin and Molotov were in a bloc with Bukharin and Rykov, the State Publishers issued a pamphlet, first edition – 200,000. This pamphlet is entitled A Reply to the Opposition. The authors are: J.V. Stalin and V.M. Molotov. The contents are the summary speeches delivered by Stalin and Molotov at the Fourteenth Party Congress on the Political Report of the Central Committee.
In his speech, Stalin revealed a “plot” hatched allegedly in 1923, after the Twelfth Party Congress, to “destroy the Political Bureau,” and to “turn the Secretariat into a political and organizational leading organ, composed of Zinoviev, Trotsky and Stalin.”
Commenting on this, “plot,” Stalin indignantly said:
“What is the import of this platform? What does it means? It means to lead the party without Rykov, without Kalinin, without Tomsky, without Molotov, without Bukharin. Nothing came of this platform at that time not only because it was unprincipled but also because it is impossible to lead the party without the above-named comrades.” (A reply to the Opposition, Moscow 1926, p. 27)
Echoing Stalin, Molotov accused the Opposition (among them Krupskaya) of seeking to exaggerate mistakes and foist “deviations” upon “comrade Bukharin, member of the Political Bureau, editor of our central organ.” And then Molotov added the following:
“This is no longer a desire to correct mistakes but rather a desire to exaggerate mistakes, a desire to create such a situation in the party as would create distrust toward the best members of our party, one of whom, as is recognized by the entire party, is comrade Bukharin.” (Idem, page 34)
In 1926, Stalin swore that it was “impossible to lead the party without Bukharin, Rykov and Tomsky.” In 1938, Stalin swears that they are “conspirators who served the interests of capitalism all their lives.” (Pravda, Feb. 28, 1938.)
 

Stalin and “Bukharin’s Blood”
In the self-same speech in 1926, Stalin accused the Opposition of “hounding” Bukharin, and of demanding, no more, no less, “Bukharin’s blood.”
Stalin said:
“How explain this unbridled baiting of comrade Bukharin? What do they really want of Bukharin? They are demanding comrade Bukharin’s blood. That is just what comrade Zinoviev demands, by aiming the barb of his attack in his summary against Bukharin. You demand Bukharin’s blood? We will not give you his blood, you might as well know it.” (Applause. Cries: Hear! Hear!) (Idem, p. 26)
 

Stalin on the “Policy of Lopping Off”
Again, in this 1926 speech, Stalin revealed yet another conspiracy – this time, to expel Trotsky from the party. The leaders in this conspiracy, if one believes Stalin, were Zinoviev and Kamenev, who, at the end of 1924, proposed to expel Trotsky from the party. Stalin, together with the majority of the Central Committee, would not agree to this proposal. Shortly thereafter, Kamenev proposed to expel Trotsky from the Political Bureau. And Stalin comments:
“... We did not agree with this proposal of the Opposition either. We obtained a majority in the Central Committee, and limited ourselves to removing comrade Trotsky from the post of People’s Commissar of War. We refused to agree with comrades Zinoviev and Kamenev because we knew that the policy of lopping off is pregnant with great dangers for the party, that the method of lopping off, the method of blood-letting – and they were demanding blood – is dangerous and contagious. Today you lop off one, tomorrow another, the next day a third – and what will then be left of our party?” (Applause) (Idem, p. 22)
In his concluding statements, Stalin once again returns to this theme. He says:
“We are against lopping off. We are against the policy of lopping off ... We are for unity and against lopping off. The policy of lopping off is revolting to us.” (p. 30)
Comments are hardly necessary.
 

The Postyshev Mystery
The defendants in the trial of the sixteen (Zinoviev-Kamenev et al.) in August 1936 confessed that among the victims of their plot Postyshev’s name figured prominently. His name is mentioned in the indictment as one of those marked for assassination. Vyshinsky in his summary speech repeated his name time and again. The defendants were shot, in part, for “conspiring” against Postyshev’s life. In the trial of the seventeen (Radek-Piatakov et al.) Jan. 1937, Postyshev’s name was again referred to as that of a prospective victim of the terrorists (see Verbatim Report, Eng. Edition, p. 328; p. 348; p. 358 etc.).
Meanwhile, Postyshev has not only been removed (together with Rudzutak) from the Political Bureau, but even from the minor party post to which he had been demoted. It is reported that he is under arrest. No doubt he plotted with the executed defendants and the defendants-to-be to “assassinate” himself as a fiendish ruse to cover up his complicity. Just as we are asked to believe that Yagoda arrested, exiled, tortured and killed thousands of Oppositionists for years in order the better to disguise the fact that they were his fellow-conspirators.
 



N.I. Bukharin
Born 1888. “One of the leaders and theoreticians of the C.P.S.U., member of the C.E.C. and the Political Committee, editor of Pravda, member of the E.C.C.I.” (Small Soviet Encyclopedia) Son of a school-teacher. Participated as high-school student in 1905 revolution. Entered Bolshevik party in 1906. Member of Moscow Committee, 1908. Arrested several times. Exiled at end of 1910 to Onega, whence he escaped abroad. Became closely connected with Lenin, “who, immediately recognized his great abilities and talent.”
While abroad was arrested by Austrian police as a “spy,” but was set free on intervention of Austrian Socialists. Says the Small Encyclopedia: “this charge was too absurd.” Deported to Switzerland. In 1915 went to Sweden, where the Swedish police arrested him as an “agent of Lenin” for his anti-militarist propaganda, charging him with alleged preparations to “blow up bridges’’ and “throw bombs.” Deported from Sweden. Went to Norway, then Denmark. Finally came illegally to the United States in 1916, where he edited the Novy Mir.
After the February revolution made his way to Moscow through Japan and Siberia.
“All his qualities make Bukharin one of the best beloved personalities of the Russian revolution.” (Small Encyclopedia)
Referred to by Lenin in his Testament as “the most valuable and biggest theoretician of the party,” and the “favorite of the whole party.” 1919–1926: head of the Communist International.
After his capitulation to Stalin, was sent on European tour by Stalin. Delivered speeches in Paris. At approximately the same time, Rakovsky was sent to Japan. These trips will undoubtedly be used in the trial to establish links between the defendants and foreign enemies.
Bukharin was one of the committee of 30 which drafted the Stalin Constitution.
* * *
A.I. Rykov
Born 1881. “One of the most eminent members of the Bolshevik party.” Participant in revolutionary movement since 1900. Arrested in March, 1901. Went to Geneva in 1902, immediately sent back to Russia for underground work. Participated in 1905 revolution, member of Petersburg Soviet of Workers’ Deputies. 1906: exiled to Siberia, escaped to Moscow. 1907: arrested and exiled to Taganrog. Went abroad, returning to Russia in Summer of 1909. Arrested almost immediately, escaped, arrested (performance repeated many times over). Exiled in Narym when February revolution broke. Member of Presidium of Moscow Soviet shortly after. Member of first Council of People’s Commissars as Commissar of the Interior. February 1918: Lenin’s deputy in Council of People’s Commissars and Council of Labor and Defense. Lenin’s successor as chairman of Council of People’s Commissars. Member of Politburo since 1919. One of most highly honored personages in the Soviet Union.
* * *
C.G. Rakovsky
Born 1873. Old revolutionist. 1889: participated in revolutionary movement in Bulgaria. 1890–1896: participated in labor movement of Switzerland, Germany and France. 1896–1903: worked in Rumania and Russia; collaborated on Lenin’s Iskra (under pen name of Insarov). 1907: arrested by Rumanian government and deported. During Balkan wars and World War arrested on several occasions. 1915: Participated in Zimmerwald Conference. May 1917: freed from prison by Russian soldiers. January–March 1918: headed struggle against counter-revolution in the Ukraine;. 1919: Chairman of Council of People’s Commissars in the Ukraine. 1923: ambassador to England. 1925–1927: ambassador to France. Oppositionist; expelled, exiled, capitulated in 1934. Sent by Stalin to Japan (undoubtedly in preparation for the trial). Appointed head of Gynecological Medical Institute. Arrested after Zinoviev-Kamenev trial.
* * *
H.G. Yagoda
Born 1891. Son of an artisan. Official Stalinist biography states that he was active in the revolutionary movement since his youth. Joined party in 1907. Arrested in Moscow in 1911. and exiled. Drafted into army in 1915; served until 1916. Active participant in October revolution in Petrograd. 1920: appointed to post in Cheka, became head of G.P.U. under Stalin. Organizer of Zinoviev-Kamenev trial.
* * *
C.F. Grinko
Born 1890. Participated in revolutionary movement (with the Social-Revolutionists) at age of 16. Expelled from university in 1913 for participating in student strike. Drafted into the army, where he remained until 1917. Spent 1914–1917 at the front, where he was promoted to rank of officer. After October revolution worked in the Ukraine as member of the Borotbysti (left wing of the Ukrainian S.R.’s), which fused in 1920 with the C.P.S.U.
1919–1926: worked in Ukrainian Soviet government, occupying several important posts (member of All-Ukrainian Revolutionary Military Committee; People’s Commissar of Education; chairman of State Planning Commission; Chairman of Ukrainian Council of People’s Commissars).
1926–1929: vice-chairman of Soviet State Planning Commission, where as chairman of the Central Commission he guided the work on the drafting of the Five-Year Plan.
1929: deputy People’s Commissar of Agriculture.
Rose with Stalin; appointed by latter to Commissariat of Finance, from which post he was removed during the recent purge.
* * *
N.N. Krestinsky
Born 1883: Old Bolshevik. Son of a high-school teacher. In revolutionary movement since 1902; joined party in 1903. Arrested several times and exiled. After February revolution, member of Ural provincial committee and of Ekaterinburg city committee. October 1917: elected Commissar of Justice. August, 1918 to end of 1922: served as People’s Commissar of Finance. 1917–1921: member of Central Committee of party. 1919–1921: secretary of the Central Committee. Member of Central Executive Committee of the Soviets Under Lenin. October 1921: made Soviet Ambassador to Berlin. 1922: participated in Hague Conference. Originally in Opposition. Capitulated to Stalin.
* * *
A.P. Rosengoltz
Born 1889. Old Bolshevik. Party member since 1905. Arrested, in 1907. After February, revolution, member of Presidium of Moscow Soviet. October 1917: member of Revolutionary Military Committee. 1918: member of Council of People’s Commissars. 1918–1921: served on fronts during civil war; also member of Revolutionary Military Committees of 5th, 7th, 8th, 13th. and 15th armies. 1922: member of Collegium of People’s Commissariat of Finance. 1923–1924: placed in charge of Air Force. 1926–1927: attached to embassy in London. At XV congress of party, elected member of Central Committee. This fact alone indicates his hostility to “Trotskyism.” Commissar of Foreign Trade under Stalin.
* * *
F. Khodzhaev
Born 1896. Former president of Uzbekistan, removed June 1937. Listed in Small Encyclopedia, as prominent Communist in Uzbekistan. Participated in national revolutionary movements since 1914. Established contact with Bolsheviks after October revolution, joining party in 1920. 1920–1924: chairman of Council of People’s Nazirs (Commissars), member of C.C. of C.P. of Bokhara. Chairman of People’s Commissars and member of C.C. of Uzbek C.P. since formation of Uzbek Soviet Republic. Staunch Stalin supporter. Honored many times. Decorated with Orders of the Red Banner and the Red Star. One of 30 Commissioners appointed at VII congress of Soviets to draft Stalin constitution.
Pravda of Jan. 31, 1935; carries front-page photo of Presidium of VII All-Union Congress of Soviets. Caption under photo: “Listening to Tukhachevsky’s speech (subject: “Red Army Mighter than Ever Before”). Stalin, Voroshilov, Kalinin, Budenny, Cherviakov (suicide), Goloded (missing:), Mussabekov (shot), and F. Khodhaev (defendant).”
* * *
Akmal Ikramov
Born 1898. Joined C.P.S.U. in February 1918. Carried on party activity until 1922, when he entered Sverdlov Communist Institute. Upon graduation elected secretary of Tashkent party committee. Then made secretary of the C.C. of the Communist party of Uzbekistan. Starting with 1931, third secretary of the Central Asiatic Bureau of the C.C. of the C.P.S.U. At the XV congress (when the Opposition was expelled), was elected candidate to Central Committee. In 1935 elected to C.C. Solid supporter of Stalin throughout. Among those picked to speak on Red Square at Kuibyshev’s funeral (Pravda, Jan. 28, 1935). Member of commission which drafted Stalin constitution.
* * *
V.I. Ivanov
Born 1893. Former chief of lumber industry under Stalin. Party member since 1915. Served in civil war. On southern front, 1920-1921. During same period secretary of Yaroslav district committee of C.P.S.U. 1924–1927: secretary of the Central Committee of Uzbekistan. 1927–1931: secretary of North Caucasian regional committee. Elected candidate to C.C. at XV and XVI Congress. Never a Trotskyite.
* * *
I.A. Zelensky
Born in 1890. Worker-Bolshevik. Former head of Consumers’ Cooperatives under Stalin. Joined party in 1906 in Samara. Arrested in 1908 and exiled to Orenburg; escaped; arrested again and sent back into exile. 1912: arrested and exiled to Narym; escaped in 1913. Caught and escaped again in 1914. Arrested in 1915, escaped, in 1916. After February revolution, organizer of Moscow district committee of the party. Later Chairman of district committee. 1921–1924: secretary of Moscow committee. 1924–1931: secretary of Central Asiatic Bureau of the C.C. of the C.P.S.U. From 1931 on: chairman of Centrosoyuz (Soviet foreign trading organization).
Elected candidate to C.C. at tenth party congress. Member of C.C. from the XI congress. Not an Oppositionist. Elected at XV congress to C.C.
* * *
M. Chernov
Former Commissar of Agriculture. Strong Stalin supporter. Not listed in any Soviet encyclopedia. Elected at VII Soviet Congress (1935) to C.E.C. of the Soviets. 1935: People’s Commissar of Agriculture. Never an Oppositionist.
* * *
Of the doctors listed: Dr. L.V. Levin (head of the Kremlin hospital) signed the statement issued by G.N. Kaminsky, then Commissar of Health, on the death of Ordjonikidze, Commissar of Heavy Industry, who allegedly died at his home on Feb. 18, 1937. Prof. Pletnev was reputed to have refused to sign this statement. Pletnev and Levin were also among the physicians who signed the death certificate of Joffe, Oppositionist and former ambassador to Tokyo, Berlin and Peiping, who committed suicide in 1927.
* * *
This leaves among the political “unknowns” the following: V. Kruchkov (identified as secretary to Gorky), B.B. Sharangovich (former secretary of the White Russian Communist Party), S.A. Bessonov (former secretary to the Soviet Embassy in Berlin), Dr. I.N. Kazakov, P. Zubareiz, V. Maximov. (Note: There was an oppositionist named Bessonov, who capitulated to Stalin. His relation to the accused Bessonov is not known to us.)
 



The Supreme Council of the Soviet Union, when in session in August, transacted what appears on the surface to have been a minor piece of business, which received little publicity in Russia and was given a routine paragraph in the world press. It issued a new tax.
Stalin found it indispensable to place a special tax on horses owned by peasants not members of the collective farms. In the territories of Great Russia, the Ukraine and White Russia this tax has been set at 500 roubles for the first horse, and 800 roubles for the second and third. In other regions the tax ranges from 400–700 roubles. The deadline, for payment is October 15 but those peasants who enroll in the collectives prior to this date are exempt from payment of the tax.
 
Decree of Sweeping Nature
The decree is so worded as to give the impression that this tax is aimed only at a section of those individual peasant proprietors who are still outside the collectives. It affects peasants who not only possess horses but also hire them out to collective farms. There can be no doubt, however regarding the sweeping nature of this decree because the long-standing shortage of horses ( following the mass slaughter of cattle by peasants during the period of enforced “wholesale” collectivization) has made it necessary for the collectives to hire horses from individual peasant proprietors.
Moreover, the competition between the various collectives to assure themselves of the indispensable supply has made this hiring very lucrative. So widespread and important has the practice become that the press has from time to time made mention of “abuses” in this sphere, and directives have periodically been issued against “discriminative practices” in favor of the individual peasant proprietors. Translated into the language of economic reality it means that the individual peasant proprietors have been able to compete very successfully with the collectives, and grow at their expense. So successfully, in fact, that drastic measures, of which the tax decree is the first, have finally been resolved upon to cope with the growing danger.
The size of the tax itself, the brief period of less than sixty days set for its collection, as well as the “exemption” proviso indicate graphically the real import and intent of this decree. The kulak danger is abroad again.
For some time now references to “agents of the kulak” have dotted the Soviet press. Obviously, a grave situation exists in agriculture. The decree is an avowal of this fact. It is an avowal that the system of collective farms is being undermined by the automatic interplay of the contradictions in Russian economic life. While milder in form, it is nevertheless a resumption of the policy of enforced collectivization pursued so disastrously in the course of the first Five-Year Plan. Stalin proposes to save the collective farms by driving the peasants into them against their will.
The problem that Stalin has so confidently declared as resolved “forever” has confronted him again under new conditions and in far more aggravated form.
Within the scope of this article it is impossible to deal with all the aspects of the new situation. There are two important factors of profound bearing on future developments that must be stressed.
 
Differences in Collectives
The struggle against the kulak must be resumed at a time when within the collectives themselves a process of differentiation is occurring very swiftly. As against 118 collective farms with an income of over a million dollars annually in 1935, there were 561 such “millionaire” collectives in 1937. (Pravda, July 28, 1938). If this were a normal consequence of the growing prosperity of the collective system as a whole, there would be no need for artificial measures to force peasants into the collectives. They would have been automatically absorbed in the extension of the collectives. But we are not witnessing any such process of healthy growth and expansion. Instead the collectives are being ripped apart internally, while being endangered from the outside by the stabilization and growth of the individual peasant proprietors. Within the collectives there is a growth of one pole of “prosperous” farmers (i.e. none other than the kulak himself) while at the other there is an expanding mass of collectivized peasants reduced to the status of agricultural laborers.
The second new factor is equally grave in its implications. One of the reasons for Stalin’s past “success” in temporarily resolving the problem of the kulak was the ability of Russian industry to absorb a vast army of raw agricultural labor. The peasants were driven not only into the collectives but also into the urban centers, where conditions, bad as they were, nevertheless provided by and large an “improvement” over the bestial and the predominantly feudal routine of rural existence. This safety valve no longer functions. In fact, the monstrous disproportions from which Soviet economy suffers – and which the regime instead of mitigating can only aggravate – have not only reduced the flow of man power from rural regions but have actually acted to reverse it.
 
Return to Village
The peasant no sooner acquaints himself with prevailing conditions in industry than he seeks to return to the village even as an agricultural laborer The trend is so marked that Pravda itself has had to publicize it. Thus, in commenting on the critical situation in the Donbas coal mining area, Pravda openly warned the management of the mines as follows: “Let them bear in mind that spring and summer are approaching – seasons when in past years, as a consequence of inattention to housing and living conditions of the workers, sections of them returned to the village to work in the fields.” (Pravda, Feb. 8, 1938). It goes without saying that this phenomenon is not limited to the Donbas region.
Only the future will tell precisely what scope and form the struggle against the kulak will assume. But it is already apparent that the class struggle in the village will shortly enter into its sharpest and most open phase.
 



The long suppressed news of the catastrophic collapse of Soviet economy under Stalin’s regime is beginning to crop up in the world press. The crisis has extend even to agriculture, the one sphere in which the regime had felt itself most secure. Only a short while ago the Stalinists were broadcasting to the world the myth of a record harvest.
These boasts were used to cover up the breakdown in the basic industries, in the production of steel, iron and coal and the acute shortage of consumers’ goods. The Soviet population we were told was at least assured of an ample stock of foodstuffs. Never again would the kulak raise his head to threaten the regime by a grain strike, by failure to deliver grain to the government. Such were the boasts. And what is the reality?
 
The New Emergency
The harvest has fallen far below expectations. The yield is so poor that Harold Denny, reporting this disaster, comments as follows:
“This year’s reduction in yield, it should be said, while unfortunate, is by no means catastrophic. No one here believes there will be an actual bread shortage. But the government is generally understood to be storing large food supplies against any possible emergency and is unceasingly pressing for big harvests.” (N.Y. Times, Oct. 8)
Nobody “believes” in a possibility of bread shortage, but the government is “understood” to be taking steps against such an emergency!
A sub-normal crop is of itself a calamity – common enough in Czarist Russia, but a thing of the past in the Soviet Union, liquidated forever by Stalin’s policy of collectivization, the world was told. It is explained away, of course, by “natural causes,” the summer’s drought, etc. But conditions last year were far worse, and yet the yield was far greater. Some other causes must have operated to reduce the crops. Prior to Stalin’s forced collectivization, it was no secret that poor crops were due to the fact that peasants refused to plant more than would suffice for their own needs. Soviet industry at that time could not supply the village with goods and the peasant in return sabotaged his production.
Are the collectives today, in which the kulaks of yesterday have entrenched themselves, pursuing the same policy, for the self-same reasons? Upon this point, Denny’s dispatch provides us with a categoric answer. Yes! Not only have the collectives failed to plant as much as they did last year, but they are neglecting the harvests wherever they have been abundant.
Denny reports:
“In much of the best grain country millions of acres of grain have been cut, but this is still standing in the fields unthreshed and suffering daily loss and deterioration. Until the crops are actually harvested the government cannot get its share.”
 
Recurrences of Grain Strikes
In every respect we have here a recurrence of the grave situation created by the “grain strike” of the original kulak years ago. The collectives are sabotaging government grain deliveries!
If years ago the Stalin clique was able to meet the crisis by a sharp shift in its economic policy, by adopting and distorting the industrialization program of the Left Opposition, and by its savage policy of forced collectivization, today it is able to cope with the situation only by police measures and by extending the blood purge to the collectives.
Denny reports a “series” of five trials in the last few weeks in distant Siberia alone. The defendants are charged with “disrupting harvesting and the program of grain deliveries – namely, grain requisitioned at nominal prices, by which method the authorities obtain much of the grain for feeding the industrial population.” In the trials the defendants are, of course, presented as the familiar scapegoats of all Moscow frame-ups, to wit, “Trotzkyist Bukharinist counter-revolutionary wreckers.”
 
Campaign Against “Kulaks”
But what is most significant is the resumption in the press of the campaign against the kulak. In the trials themselves the defendants are especially denounced as “former kulaks and former White Guards.” The men who are being shot and jailed are none other than the administrative staff of the collectives: collective farm chairmen, granary managers, timekeepers, blacksmiths, tractor station managers and so on.
The demands in the press that the purge continue “until the last enemies have been exposed” signifies that from one end of the country to the other the administrative personnel of the collectives will be decimated thus producing the same havoc as in industry. Far from alleviating the situation it can only speed the disintegration of the collectives.
This newest purge has been carefully hidden thus far. But we can estimate its scope from the single fact that out of 28 commissars nominated by Molotov and unanimously elected by the Supreme Soviet Council last January only 17 still retain their posts. Eleven members of the government have already been purged, and at least six others have their heads on the chopping bloc. The Stalin regime is tottering, nothing can save it.
 



No official statistics relating to the Stalinist purge have been issued. None will be forthcoming. Nevertheless on the basis of indirect data in the Stalinist press the number can be roughly approximated. A figure of 1,000,000–1,500,000 for the past two years would be a conservative estimate.
In December 1937, Walter Krivitsky, leading Soviet diplomat who refused to return to Russia, stated that in May of that year he had learned from an authoritative source that the number of political arrests had at that time reached the total of not less than 300,000, the majority being party members and members of their families. In the period since May, the number of arrests had considerably increased and Krivitsky estimated it to be in the neighborhood of half-a-million.
Krivitsky’s estimate is indirectly borne out by a dispatch from Denny during this same period:
“The purge continues unabated although it has now been going on so long that its trials and executions have become routine news stripped of all dramatic value.” (N.Y. Times, Dec. 2, 1937)
Replacement and Purges
However, we have a far more authoritative verification. In January of this year Pravda asserted that: “More than 100,000 people have been advanced to leading posts during last year alone – in districts, provinces, federated and autonomous People’s Commissariats. More than 100,000!” ... The advancement has acquired a mass character, it is becoming almost everywhere a mass phenomenon. (Jan. 27. Emphasis in the original)
It goes without saying that for every individual who was “advanced” another one was removed, i.e., purged. It is equally clear that for every “leading” functionary a number of subordinates, to say nothing of relatives, were caught in the dragnet. A ratio of 5 to 1 is hardly exaggerated. Thus on the basis of Pravda’s boast, the number of those purged during “last year alone” can be set at not less than 500,000. The appalling implication of the figure mentioned in Pravda becomes clear if we bear in mind that Pravda cited it only to call for an intensification of this campaign of “advancement.” It was only a modest beginning! In March came the Bukharin-Rykov frame-up as part of the machinery of speeding up the purge.
At that time Webb Miller, United Press staff correspondent, reported from Moscow:
“Many thousands of persons have been arrested – the number perhaps running into five figures – throughout the Soviet republics since the recent treason trials.” (N.Y. Post, March 8)
 
“Tens of Thousands ...”
In July, Walter Duranty was able to state with satisfaction that
“there is no doubt that it (the purge) cut a deep furrow through every phase of national life. To prove this it is sufficient to compare published membership lists of official bodies, from the high military council to local Soviets, of two years ago and now, or to read reports of changes of the personnel in Communist party secretariats, both provincial and municipal, and in government administrative positions.” (N.Y. Times, July 26)
The spheres and the changes enumerated by Duranty embrace not isolated individuals but the entire party and administrative apparatus of the country, that is to say, thousands upon tens of thousands of people.
We continually meet with this refrain of “new thousands.” Thus, in August, Izvestia stated that “in the recent period thousands of new people have been advanced to leading posts in People’s Commissariats and the administrative bodies”. (August 28. Our emphasis) And only the other day, Denny reported on the Army purge as follows:
“The purge that is still continuing in the Red Army, though apparently on a smaller scale, is being accompanied by promotions of thousands of junior officers to responsible posts.” (N.Y. Times, Oct. 17. Our emphasis)
 
Yardstick for Data
The scope of the “promotions” provides a yardstick for the real extent of the purge. Let us apply it to those isolated cases in which the Stalinist press provides us with some statistics.
In Pravda, for July 22, A. Akopov, director of the Ural Heavy Machinery Plant made the following boast:
“There are more than 400 engineers and technicians in the construction department of Uralmash. Of these only 3 completed their studies prior to 1917, all the others are from among the Soviet youth.”
We also learn that “more than 250 Stakhanovists from among the labor and technical personnel have been promoted to leading posts.” Here we have a purge of more than 60 per cent in a single department. So we are not shocked to discover that in this plant there were:
“a foreign specialist, the spy Z....; former chief metallurgist, the diversionist P....; head of the central laboratory, the spy D....; former head of the forging-press dep’t, Z....; chief engineer, the wrecker L.... former head of the order bureau, the spy K....”
 
One-Year-Olds
Here is a report of the results of the Party Conference in the city of Stalinsk:
“In the Kuznets metallurgical plant named after Stalin, the cadres of the party have been vigorously renovated in the last year. The majority of the secretaries of shop committees and group organizations are new people – their past record in party work does not exceed one year.” (Pravda, July 22)
Finally, we take the instance of the Don Basin. Time and again has the administration been purged, culminating in the sweeping changes effected by Kaganovich in October of last year. Pravda commented as follows:
“The People’s Commissar of Heavy Industry, com. L.M. Kaganovich has reorganized ‘Glavugol’; he has expelled from there the apologists of wreckers’ theory ... the bureaucrats and the office holders; he has reinforced the apparatus of the chief administration with young engineers, tested communists, people who know their jobs and are desirous of fighting for the convalescence of the coal industry.” (Oct. 2, 1937)
 
“Worthless Directors”
On June 11, 1938, Pravda announced the removal of these “worthless directors” and boasted of a new leading staff embracing: 260 mine superintendents; 240 chief engineers, 610 heads of sectors, 400 “leaders of tens,” 650 Stakhanovists, 120 organizers and 140 chairmen of mine committees.
Said Pravda:
“The chief task of the directors of ‘Donbasugol’ was to transmit the experience of the advanced mines in the struggle for coal to the laggard mines, to put an end once and for all to criminal negligence and to proceed to root out the consequences of wrecking ... The former leaders of ‘Donbasugol’ failed to do this. Departmental-bureaucratic methods of management predominated in their work. The worthless directors have been removed.” (June 11)
In October of this year, the Donbas has been reorganized once again, this time into three separate units. No purge was reported in connection with this reorganization but it doubtless took place. If the purge elsewhere assumed the same proportions it would involve not 1% but several millions. We presume that these are exceptional cases.
 
Commissariats Cleansed
Of the 28 Commissariats (established in January) 11 have been purged from top to bottom. These include the commissariats of Agriculture, Trade, Mechanical Construction, Light Industry, Food Industry, Land Transport, Finance, and Farm Products Storage. On Oct. 2, came the news of the reorganization of the State Bank, with the appointment of Bulganin as chairman, and three deputies. All four of these new appointees are G.P.U. functionaries – an evil omen to the personnel!
The naval commissariat has been purged. The purge in the Army continues. While there has been no confirmation of Bluecher’s arrest, it is known that his entire general staff and scores of his closest collaborators have been arrested.
The refusal of collectives to deliver grain to the government is being met by the extension of the purge into the collectives. This list far from exhausts the countless thousands who are involved. In the light of these facts our estimate of those who have fallen victims to the purge at three times the figure set by Krivitsky last December is, if anything, an underestimation.
 




Among the arguments first employed to justify the military monopoly of atomic energy was the contention that it would take huge sums and many years before this epoch-making discovery could be developed for civilian uses.
The Brass Hats and the administration in Washington found this flimsy argument rather embarrassing in view of the fact that even the low-temperature atomic piles at Hanford were meanwhile producing as much energy as Boulder Dam, all this energy going to waste, heating up the Columbia River.
They were further embarrassed by public statements of scientists that in its present state this energy was already available for use as a source of power, heat and electricity, not to mention its urgent and immediate need for medicine, agriculture, scientific research, etc.
And so, after a delay of at least two years they have announced that a high-temperature atomic power plant will be built at Oak Ridge, Tenn. It will be purely “experimental”, that is, remain under rigid military control. No information has been released about any of its technical aspects. But the campaign to belittle and discredit its potential benefits has already begun.
The favorite line of argument now runs that atomic power is of questionable value for Industrial and civilian use, because after all, fuel comprises only a small fraction of the cost of operating electrical power plants. With a serious air a debate is now being conducted in public on whether or not atomic energy can compete successfully with coal or oil.
This debate is so important that the editors of N.Y. Times deem it necessary to add their authoritative voice to the side of the “doubters”.
“Transmission, distribution and administration costs are far greater than fuel costs ... so that the saving in fuel will have to be striking if a uranium ‘pile’ is to take the place of coal.” (N.Y. Times, May 12)
 
Vast Savings
As a matter of fact, this argument speaks not against but overwhelmingly in favor of atomic power plants. If fuel costs are not the decisive consideration, then the atomic “piles” can be far more expensive than the use of coal and oil or water power (which no one even bothers to pretend) and still compete with the present plants. Why? Because of the vast savings in transmission and distribution costs.
Atomic power plants can be erected close by industries and cities: they can be built anywhere, in the remotest region as well as the most accessible one, in the most densely populated areas as well as those most sparsely populated. The costs of transmission and distribution can thereby be cut to the barest minimum, which is impossible with the existing plants.
As for the costs of “administration,” the atomic plants are automatic and self-operating, requiring virtually no labor after once set up. And, what is far worse from the capitalist standpoint, they will cut out completely the annual tribute extracted by the huge public utility monopolies.
They will not only render existing facilities obsolete but also make it difficult to establish private ownership in this field. The capitalists can and should get exactly nothing from the development of atomic power. It follows that from the standpoint of “administration” the costs will once again be slashed to barest minimums.
Let us note in conclusion one other incredible argument which the editors of N.Y. Times employ in their zeal to place a big question mark over the future of atomic power. They claim that they have been “misled by the oft-quoted statement that a pound of uranium or plutonium will generate as much energy as we now get from 1,400 tons of coal or 900 tons of gasoline. The comparison assumes the complete conversion of uranium or plutonium into energy.”
 
Incredible Argument
The comparison, as is well known, assumes nothing of the sort. It is based on the assumption of converting only a fraction of a pound of uranium into energy, less than 1 per cent. (The atomic bomb converts approximately one-thirtieth of an ounce of mass into energy.) A complete conversion of a pound of uranium would release approximately 100 times the quantity cited by the Times’ editors, who only pretend to be misinformed.
According to the computation of the scientists they are able to release at the present stage of development only the maximum of 1 per cent conversion of the uranium mass into energy. Once again this is a powerful argument not against but in favor of atomic power. If such vast vistas are opened up when there is only one per cent at our disposal, they will be multiplied geometrically as mankind learns to use the major portion of the remaining 99 per cent. But the imperialist rulers of the world bar this road.
They cannot and will not employ atomic power for the benefit of mankind, but only for its destruction.
 



In a recent public speech at St. Louis, Dr. Harold C. Urey, Nobel Prize winner and one of the world’s outstanding physicists, expressed the fear that he and all those associated with him in nuclear research will be “cursed by generations to come.” Dr. Urey’s somber prediction puts into words the mood of pessimism verging on prostration which prevails among the overwhelming majority of the men of science.
It might appear that the explanation for this pessimism is to be found in the very nature of their discovery. The scientists made atomic energy initially available on a large scale in the form of an explosive. But in and of itself there is nothing alarming in such a development.
In the first place, it is much easier and simpler to gain releases of energy at slow rates and in small amounts than it is to obtain such vast and sudden quantities of energy as will produce an explosion. In the very process of exploding nuclear energy, the scientists were obliged at the same time to solve many of the key problems of releasing this energy in forms which are easily adaptable to industrial and civilian use.
Moreover, explosives can be and have been harnessed. Let us recall that the first combustion engine was the cannon. The internal combustion engine is essentially a mechanism whereby millions of small explosions are controlled and converted into motive power. The jet propulsion engine, still in its infancy, is a mechanism for controlling much larger and more powerful explosions. To be sure, atomic explosives are far more difficult to control, but, as every qualified scientist knows, it is a practical problem. In return for all the difficulties, undreamed-of motor forces will eventually be at the disposal of society. A sober and conservative sketch of the theoretical perspectives of the “atomic age” seems more far-fetched than ever did the most imaginative flights of Jules Verne or the Arabian fairy tales. The tapping of nuclear energy is the most revolutionary discovery in history.
All social progress depends, first and foremost, on the sources of energy at the disposal of society. Every advance in this field has led to momentous consequences. But these advances have been few and far between. Hence the painfully slow and tortuous development of society. For untold centuries, social progress ran up against material limits, especially the fact that no other source of energy was available except the muscular energy of the human organism. The discovery and application of tools could multiply this energy and render its utilization more efficient only within a very narrow framework. The use of domesticated animals was in its time an epoch-making invention enlarging man’s power. Throughout the pre-historic periods, as well as thousands of years later, it was still possible to work upon nature primarily through animal power, primarily through millions of slaves. Man’s extremely limited mastery of nature in the past was maintained by the establishment of man’s mastery over man. Let us note, in passing, that this tended to stabilize the age-long institution of slavery.
The harnessing of water power (watermills) and of air currents (windmills, sails) played an important role in advancing technology but did not add greatly to the reservoirs of energy.
The giant leap of modern society is correctly dated back to the so-called industrial revolution of only a few centuries ago. The material premise of the latter was the discovery and use of coal as a new and revolutionary source of energy. The principle of the steam engine has been known for 17 centuries. But lacking was the fuel to operate it, as well as the knowledge of metallurgy to construct adequate boilers.
With the industrial revolution, science and technology made colossal strides. Nevertheless, the fact is that in terms of power resources, the situation has not altered as much as one might imagine. Coal, for instance, is still the key fuel. Of the total world energy produced, coal still accounts for more than 70 percent; oil and natural gas – 25 percent; waterpower – 5 percent.
Things have been literally altered overnight by the work of the atomic scientists. They have tapped the secret of secrets, making available the basic source of energy not only on our planet but in the universe. It is estimated that a pound of fissionable fuel (uranium) is equivalent as a source of energy to several thousand tons of coal, more than a quarter of a million gallons of oil, and approximately 50 million cubic feet of natural gas. In terms of electrical power, one pound of U-235 is equivalent to an annual output of 1,400 kilowatts per hour. This means that a single atomic power plant with 5 tons of U-235 would match the annual output of all the existing hydroelectric plants in this country, whose capacity is rated at 14 million kilowatts. Atomic power plants of 300 ton capacity would match all the energy (coal, oil, and waterpower) produced in the US. [These figures are estimated on the basis of utilizing one-one-thousandth of the total energy in one pound of uranium.] There are no grounds whatever for the contention (deliberately propagated) that such use of atomic energy will require research of untold years. At this very moment there exist sources of heat, light and electricity capable of replacing coal. The atomic piles in the State of Washington which are now heating up the Columbia River are such rudimentary power plants. An infinitesimal fraction of the huge sums still being spent on the production of atomic bombs would suffice to convert these atomic piles for industrial and civilian purposes. No less fraudulent are the contentions that such enterprises would be extremely dangerous, or more costly, less efficient, less reliable, etc., than existing power facilities.
We do not mean to say that the full potentialities of nuclear energy, or even a major part of them, can be realized within a brief period. Eventually this discovery will transform not only every branch of industry, especially metallurgy, but also every branch of science. Future chemistry, physics, biology, etc., will differ as profoundly from their present state as modern industrial processes differ from those of the stone age. The vast and still undreamed-of possibilities of the application of atomic energy to research, medicine, agriculture, industry and other fields of activity – that is the music of the future. But the whole point is that in the very process of exploding atomic energy, the scientists have placed in the grasp of mankind an unlimited source of power, heat, light, electricity.
Assuredly those who have opened up such vistas could with justification expect their names to be enrolled among the greatest benefactors. Universal acclaim and honor have invariably been accorded to those who have enlarged human resources. For the sake of illustration, suffice it to cite the case of Edison. By his invention of the electric bulb, Edison became a symbol of progress, an almost legendary figure among the peoples of the world. It would enter no one’s mind to affirm that posterity will brand his name with infamy. Still, the attainments of Edison were relatively modest. In any case, they pale by comparison with the scope and significance of the work of the atomic scientists. Here are men who have achieved the dreams of their predecessors. Theirs is the crowning discovery of all the past scientific endeavors. They have scaled heights that seemed to be beyond the reach of contemporary science.
And yet what is their own verdict? They gloomily foresee, in Urey’s words, the condemnation of history. In their own eyes, they appear, by implication, to be worthy not of respect but contumely. The foremost scientists expect in reward for their greatest successes – to be forever cursed by the future generations. Why? Because they expect their discovery to be used only for purposes of destruction.
 
Pessimism of Scientists
The pessimism of the American scientists is all the more startling because if they had any faith at all it was faith in unlimited progress, above all through science. Their view of the march of history was primitive but optimistic in the extreme. In the words of the historian Charles A. Beard, it meant:
... moving from one technological triumph to another, overcoming the exhaustion of crude natural resources and energies, effecting an ever wider distribution of the blessings of civilization – health, security, material goods, knowledge, leisure, and aesthetic appreciation, and through the cumulative forces of intellectual and artistic reactions, conjuring from the vast deeps of the nameless and unknown creative imagination of the noblest order, subduing physical things to the empire of the spirit ...
This harmonious and uninterrupted movement from “one technological triumph to another” is a purely arbitrary construction. It represents a simplification and vulgarization of all movement in nature, society and science in particular. What such an outlook really advances is the inevitability of gradual-ness. Yet as every scientist knows, side by side with slow, molecular (gradual) changes there occur in every sphere sudden (catastrophic) changes, explosions, leaps forward and backward. At a certain stage, gradualness becomes transformed into its very opposite.
By the savage irony of history, upon reaching the very gateway to unlimited scientific horizons, implicit in the unlimited source of power they have discovered, the scientists find their traditional optimistic outlook in complete conflict with reality.
While assimilating the most advanced ideas in their own specialized fields, these men have remained conservative and even reactionary in the sphere of social thought and action. If they thought about it at all, they took it for granted that there existed complete correspondence between contemporary social organization and social needs. To be sure, a few things might be amiss here and there, but it was only a question of some minor readjustments, which would be solved in passing as science marched on from one triumph to the next.
The fact, however, is that there is no such correspondence at all. From a relative obstacle to progress, capitalism has long since turned into an absolute brake upon it. Almost one hundred years ago, Marx and Engels warned that the welfare of society was incompatible with the regime of capitalism. Today it is no longer a question of inevitable social stagnation and decay, but literally of physical survival.
“The life of monopolistic capitalism in our time,” wrote Leon Trotsky, “is a chain of crises. Each crisis is a catastrophe. The need of salvation from these partial catastrophes by means of tariff walls, inflation, increase of government spending, and debts lays the ground for additional, deeper, and more widespread crises. The struggle for markets, for raw materials, for colonies makes military catastrophes unavoidable.”
Summed up in these words is the actual movement of contemporary society, especially during the last three decades. It may not be as consoling as the thesis of gradualism, but it has the advantage of being scientifically exact. Moreover it points the only way out of the impasse in which humanity finds itself today. Unconditionally necessary is the abolition of a social system that is capable of surviving, even temporarily, only through periodic destruction of the productive forces in a series of increasingly devastating economic and military paroxysms.
The parasitism of monopolistic capitalism is malignant. The latest symptom of this malignancy is the use to which nuclear energy has been put since its discovery. Unlimited power is being applied solely for the purposes of unlimited destruction. This is not a theoretical forecast but the grimmest of realities. It has provided the dominant theme for the public utterances of most of the atomic scientists. It is the keynote of their latest publication, One World or None.
And they are now in process of making still another shocking discovery. They are discovering how impotent they are even to mitigate the situation. Despite all their collective efforts, not a dent has been made in the military control of atomic energy. The MacMahon Bill, on which they pinned such great hopes, perpetuates this military control through the simple device of a revised amendment by Senator Vandenberg. This “revision” consists merely of adding a little red tape to the original amendment, which aroused such universal protest among the scientists, not to mention the bill’s sponsor MacMahon. The Brass Hats retain the veto power, only instead of exercising it in their own name they must henceforth do it through the Secretaries of War and the Navy. Moreover, there are secret provisions to the bill, which, as reported by columnist Drew Pearson, make it a crime even to gather “commercial” information concerning nuclear energy.
In the meantime, the plants producing atomic explosives continue to operate around the clock, 24 hours a day. The stockpile of bombs and explosive materials is growing by leaps and bounds. Periodically the public is informed that new improvements are either on the way or have already been introduced. Vast sums continue to be secretly spent. The cost of operating the existing plants alone runs in the neighborhood of a half-billion dollars a year.
An international atomic armaments race is on. It is not true that even the “know-how” can long be kept a secret; nor that only countries with the most advanced industrial plant can manufacture these bombs. The minimum requirements are: adequate laboratory equipment, technical personnel and the necessary raw materials. Authoritative scientists have testified before Congressional committees that atomic armament plants can be built for 100-million dollars, and even less.
 
The Race for Pitchblende
In the previous struggles over raw materials (oil, rubber, tin, etc.) the great powers were content with grabbing the lion’s share. It is otherwise with pitchblende, and other ores bearing fissionable raw materials. Here, the precondition for supremacy is nothing short of world monopoly. American imperialism is determined to achieve such monopoly. This is the gist of the Acheson-Lilienthal report, drafted and issued under the auspices of the US State Department. Furthermore, complete control of raw materials is not enough; it must be supplemented by a world monopoly of all the industrial processing of these materials. This, too, is provided for by the Acheson-Lilienthal report.
Bleakest of all are the prospects of the United Nations organization, upon which the scientists tend to look as the surest avenue of salvation. This “world” body is the very center of preparations for the next world war and will continue to serve in this capacity so long as it exists.
The helplessness of the scientists is not a temporary condition, but is inherent in their social position. They are precluded by the dynamics of the class struggle from playing an independent role. The decisive word in society rests only with the classes that play an independent role in the productive process. The scientists play no such role. They are therefore faced with the choice of allying themselves with labor or with the capitalists. An alliance with the latter can only help precipitate the very catastrophe the scientists hope to avert. On the other hand, in alliance with labor’s struggle for socialism they can individually and collectively play a very great role.
Civilization can be saved from atomic explosives in the bands of the imperialists only through a social explosion, or revolution. It ought not be too difficult for those who readily accept explosions as an integral part of the natural processes and who guided by that knowledge succeeded in exploding the tiniest particles of matter – it ought not be hard for them to understand that the same thing holds true of social processes.
All the conditions for revolution are prepared by the uninterrupted series of economic, political and military crises into which society is plunged by monopolistic capitalism. Human beings cannot continue to live indefinitely in a society that totters on the brink of the abyss. When the break in mass moods comes, heralding the objectively revolutionary situation in this country, the revulsion will be all the more violent, and the tempo of revolutionary events all the more rapid.
Here an objection may be raised that to stake everything on the revolution is to invite disaster, especially in face of the atomic bomb. This is merely a restatement of the hoary argument of all those who counted up the number of rifles, guns, tanks, planes, and soldiers in a country and invariably credited them to the side of the counter-revolution. Naturally, if the existing apparatus of repression remains intact in the hands of the ruling class, then no revolution is possible. But the revolution is precisely a revolution by reason of the fact that it permeates every nook and cranny of the social organism, leaving nothing untouched. The ruling class finds itself isolated. Even the servants, the cooks and butlers depart. The rulers begin to vacillate, and finally become rendered incapable of action. Under the onset of the masses, their apparatus of repressions crumbles to pieces.
During the Russian Revolution the Czarist officers were confident that all they needed was a single strong regiment to put down the masses. In his History of the Russian Revolution, Trotsky wrote:
One strong regiment is all the enemy needs! ... This idea, by the way, will meet us in different versions throughout all the stages of the revolution. “Give me a strong regiment,” gallant colonels will more than once exclaim to their friends, “and in two seconds I will clean up all this mess!” And some of them, as we shall see, will make the attempt. But they will all have to repeat Khabalov’s words: “The regiment starts, starts under a brave officer, but ... there are no results.” Yes, and how could there be results?
The handful of monopoly capitalists can hardly expect any different results once the overwhelming majority of the American people, led by the working class, rises up against them.







(This is fourth in a series of articles in connection with the publication of Leon Trotsky’s biography of Stalin.)
[1]



In writing this book it was Trotsky’s intention from the very outset to place the stress on the early or “preparatory period” of Stalin’s life. As the author explains in his introduction, the facts of Stalin’s more recent political activities “are known to every literate person.” For this reason, despite the fact that the latter portion remained uncompleted, the essential part of the biography as Trotsky conceived it is nevertheless available to the reader.
At every phase Trotsky analyzes the powerful forces that shaped Stalin’s personality preparing the future dictator. First, he describes Stalin’s childhood and adolescence; then his school years and stay at the theological seminary. Next, Stalin’s entry into the revolutionary movement, his role in the upsurge of the first revolution (1905) and the ensuing period of reaction (1907–12).
Trotsky outlines the resurgence of the Russian mass movement (1912–14) which was cut across by the First World War and the temporary ascendancy of reaction that swept Stalin, together with hundreds of others of his generation, into Czarist Siberian exile, from which the February 1917 revolution was to set them all free. All this and much more Trotsky succeeded in fully completing.
 
Treasure of Information
Thus despite its restricted scope this book is a veritable treasure trove of information about the three revolutions in Russia (1905, February 1917, October 1917), the ensuing Civil War; about the building of the Red Army and of the creation of a new state power; about the generations that accomplished this mighty labor and the younger generations on whose shoulders Stalin later rode into power.
Trotsky delineates how obscure Stalin’s role really was in the greatest revolutionary events of our era. At the same time, the book gives intimate glimpses of the leading personalities who really comprised the general staff of Bolshevism, headed by Lenin and Trotsky.
Its pages provide a lucid and brilliant exposition of the struggle for socialism, a cause to which the author devoted his entire conscious life. In addition section after section of this book graphically explains how the main instrument of the struggle for socialism was constructed.
 
Lenin’s Party
This instrument – the proletarian party – which Lenin began building at the close of the nineteenth century and which took definite shape in the first 17 years of the’ twentieth century, was indeed something new. In its day Bolshevism was as epoch-making an invention in the political field as, say, the discovery of atomic energy is in the field of scientific endeavor.
With the growth and development of Lenin’s party, a new type of political thinker and warrior arose for the first time among the ranks of the working class in the cities of the Czarist empire. Young men and women began to call themselves “professional revolutionists.” This means that the liberating struggle of the proletariat became their lifetime “trade” or occupation. Whatever other skills they attained – and these were many and varied – were subordinated to the development and perfection of this primary revolutionary skill or “profession.”
Stalin was one among many in Lenin’s great army of Bolshevism. He remained in its ranks only so long as Lenin remained alive, or in other words, only so long as he – Stalin – remained a subordinate figure. In the party of Lenin, a personality like Stalin’s could not and did not play any other role. Trotsky proves this to the hilt. In the pages of Stalin, Trotsky unfailingly juxtaposes the essence and spirit of Lenin’s party with every stage in the development of an individual who evolved into a polar opposite of a genuine Bolshevik leader and fighter.
 
Defends Bolshevism
Stalin did not begin as the full-fledged monster that now rules in the Kremlin. He rose to prominence gradually by betraying – step by step – the traditions, principles and program of Lenin’s party, by becoming transformed into its gravedigger. This is likewise proved to the hilt by Trotsky.
The biography is, in consequence, not merely a historical indictment of a modern despot, and of Stalinism, as a system of ideas and practices; it is at the same time a great historical defense and justification of Lenin, the Bolshevik system of ideas and the party of Bolshevism.
This is the basic content of Stalin. This is Trotsky’s basic design.
The capitalist reviewers without exception have reacted hostilely to the book.
In explaining the struggle for socialism and concurrently the character of the most important instrument in this struggle, Trotsky deals heavy blows to all contemporary slaveholders and despots, first and foremost the capitalist rulers of Wall Street and their government in Washington.
They not only hate this book, they fear it. For it conveys the most attractive, powerful and truthful ideas yet attained by mankind. On the granite foundation of these ideas, Lenin built his epoch-making party in Russia. Why can’t the far more advanced American workers follow in millions the path already blazed by their Russian brothers?
The answer is they can and they will – once they find their path to Leninism, which in our day is synonymous with Trotskyism.
Yes, the capitalist rulers and all their apologists have every reason to disparage and attack this book. We, who are the disciples of Lenin and Trotsky, on the contrary, recommend it most highly to every thinking worker, and in particular to the youth of this country who are searching for the revolutionary way out of the bloody blind-alley of imperialism.
* * *
Footnote by ETOL
1. See note in previous issue of The Militant.
 







This is a third in a series of articles in connection with the publication of Leon Trotsky’s biography of Stalin.
[1]



This book shows how the personality of the incumbent dictator in the Kremlin was molded through the years and what were the outstanding personal traits that fitted him for this future role. At the same time the author discloses the nature of those social forces inside the Soviet Union that swept Stalin into power after Lenin’s death, along with the workings of the mechanism whereby Stalin was able step by step to usurp the right to such an exceptional role.
According to official legend, elaborately manufactured in the course of more than two decades by a legion of hirelings, lickspittles and falsifiers. Stalin is pictured as Lenin’s closest and most trusted collaborator, as the latter’s “best disciple” and co-builder of the Russian Bolshevik Party, as a heroic figure in the Civil War of 1919–21, invariably and unfailingly at Lenin’s side, as the originator of planned economy, etc. etc. The truth is just the reverse.
 
Real Role
Stalin’s real role and character clearly emerge in this book. By painstakingly tracing the career of the future dictator from his birth in 1879 to the year 1923, when he first began to emerge from the shadows, Trotsky does not leave a single stone standing of this official vast edifice of distortions, lies and brazen forgeries.
It is noteworthy that not even the most hostile critics of the book have been able or willing to challenge a single item in the rich factual material presented by the author. This biography is documented with scrupulous objectivity and conscientiousness, despite the fact that it deals with a period in Stalin’s life concerning which least has been known and strictest secrecy enforced for years.
As an orthodox Marxist and its most authoritative and brilliant exponent since Lenin’s death, Trotsky seeks for an explanation of Stalin’s role primarily in the mechanics of the class struggle. Prominent individuals in history are in the final analysis, social symbols— personifications of specific class forces.
What made Stalin an ideal mirror of the monstrous bureaucracy that rose in the USSR in the period of reaction following the October Revolution, are precisely his outstanding and most deeply rooted personal traits, namely: “distrust of the masses, utter lack of imagination, short-sightedness, an inclination to follow the line of least resistance.”
So organic in this individual is his lust for power coupled with his indifference towards the oppressed—which later turned into suspicion and distrust, and still later into animal fear — that his very act of joining the revolutionary movement was motivated exclusively by such negative reactions as envy and hatred of the rulers.
Genuine revolutionists, while remaining mortal enemies of the oppressors, are cast in an entirely different mold. They are imbued with deepest sensitivity for and love of the masses, incarnating their courage, their unyielding will to struggle, their spirit of devotion and self-sacrifice, their age-long aspirations and hopes.
 
‘Flesh of the Machine’
Stalin’s personal qualities made him an ideal cog in a complex political machine. He became, as Trotsky put it, “flesh of the flesh of the machine and the toughest of its bones.” In the periods of most turbulent mass upsurge he could think and react in no other terms. Thus one of the earliest agitational appeals written by Stalin to the insurgent masses in the 1905 period centers around a summons for them to rally not around their mass organization but around the “committee- men.”
The role of such an individual is the smaller as all the greater becomes the sweep of the mass movement. This is precisely what happened in Stalin’s case, and Trotsky demonstrates it irrefutably. The same qualities that facilitated Stalin’s rise on the rungs of the machine-ladder, especially in the period following the October Revolution, pushed him to the background in periods of mass upsurge in 1905, 1912 and 1917, the revolutionary peaks of Russian history.
At each of these historical turning points we find Stalin withdrawing into the shadows, vacillating, incapable of adhering to a revolutionary line, let alone assuming the initiative in advancing it. An opportunist to the core, he exhibits this most glaringly immediately following the February 1917 revolution when we find him among those preaching conciliation with the Mensheviks and urging support of the counter-revolutionary Provisional Government.
 
Law of Politics
Conversely it was precisely in these periods of great mass upsurge that individuals like Lenin and Trotsky were propelled most sharply to the fore. While Stalin in 1905 was explaining the virtues of “committeemen” to the Georgian people, the youthful Trotsky played a foremost role in the activities of the Petrograd Soviet, becoming its Chairman during the concluding stages of the Soviet’s revolutionary existence. Trotsky resumed this role in 1917, taking his place side by side with Lenin, as the leader of the October insurrection in Petrograd, and later as organizer-leader of the Red Army and co-architect with Lenin of the young Soviet state and the Communist International.
In the course of his detailed exposition Trotsky demonstrates what may be called one of the laws of politics, namely, that with the weakening of the mass movement the preponderance of political machines increases almost in reverse proportions, and with it, of necessity, the role played by apparatus men, in the given case, by Djugashvili-Stalin.
Stalin is invaluable among other things because it brings a clearer understanding of the paths whereby reaction was able to triumph in the Soviet Union; of how stage by stage the machine, under the leadership of Stalin, succeeded first in isolating the revolutionary proletarian vanguard inside the USSR and then in destroying the great party of Lenin. The reader is thus enabled to grasp more easily all of the Kremlin’s subsequent and current crimes and betrayals of the world struggle for socialism.
* * *
Footnote by ETOL
1. The first part in this series appeared in The Militant, Vol. X No. 20, 18 May 1946. In the following issue there was no article by John G. Wright on this topic, although a statement by Natalia Sedova Trotsky about the biography was published. This would therefore appear to be the second rather than the third part of the series.
 



Antoinette Konikow was a revolutionary socialist to the last day of her life. A striking incident the night before she died indicates her spirit. 
One of her friends in the medical profession, a leading Boston psychiatrist, visited her. Antoinette has long been famous in the medical world. But the conversation quickly turned to questions far more important than shop talk. Antoinette raised the question of dialectical materialism. The doctor responded with an attack on the dialect method claiming that it has not been borne out by latest developments in science.
Antoinette did not spend much time on the defensive. Almost 60 years as a Marxist had taught her the extraordinary importance of the dialectic method, and all her experiences in the medical field as well as study in other sciences had only confirmed what she had learned from the great Marxist teachers. She opened up with a counter-attack that quickly won her the upper hand. And then to pursue her advantage she persuaded her foe in dialectics to continue the subject the following night.
Antoinette wanted to pass on to the younger generation the lessons and truths gleaned in a long lifetime of hard experience. Three years ago, she retired from active practice, intending to devote the remainder of her life entirely to recording the most important things she had learned.
She assembled the great mass of notes she had jotted down from time to time and began putting them in order. First on the agenda was her memoirs. After writing about her childhood and youth in Czarist Russia and Germany as a background, she took up her political recollections. These begin with her impressions of George Plekhanov, the founder of Russian Marxism and teacher of Lenin.
Still Learning—At 76!
To facilitate her work she decided last winter to learn touch typing—at the age of 76! Her letters to the Political Committee changed all at once from the long-familiar, diffieult-to-de- cipher handwriting to neatly typed communications.
But she did not succeed in finishing her memoirs. The considerable body of material she leaves will have to be assorted and woven together by someone else.
Her main objective in this work was to leave the younger generation with a true impression of more than a half century of revolutionary socialism. She had seen what damage opportunism can do. With her own eyes she saw the Second International brought to ruin and betrayal. In the light of this experience she understood to the full the need for battling Stalinism tooth and nail, for the Stalinist regime not only spreads the same poison-of opportunism as the Second International, but wields totalitarian state power with utter ruthlesness.
Consequently she devoted a great deal of her last days to analyzing the revolutionary period of the Communist International in order to show what the Bolsheviks under Lenin and Trotsky really set out to do. The task of her gener- action, she felt, was to hand on the program of revolutionary socialism as Marx, Engels, Lenin and Trotsky had shaped it. Her study of the First Four Congresses of the Communist International resulted in an outline for class use and much additional unpublished material.
She wanted especially to write down her impressions of the Bolshevik generation that led the October 1917 revolution. Many of them she knew personally. They were the men cruelly slandered by Stalin as fascist “dogs gone mad.” She knew them to be victims of Stalin, framed- up in the Moscow trials organized by the Kremlin dictator.
In 1940 she visited Leon Trotsky and his wife Natalia at Coyoacan. There the friendship with the great revolutionary couple, already many years old,: was still more firmly cemented. The assassination of Trotsky by a GPU agent was a terrible personal blow to Antoinette.
Despite her age, Antoinette followed the press very closely. She intervened actively in political events, following the Militant and Fourth International and sending in her criticisms and opinions.
Recently she pointed out the necessity for the European Trotskyist movement to start up a paper in the Russian language. She mentioned the hundreds of thousands of Russian-speaking refugees now in various countries. The paper, she thought, should be popularly written, and even if her own Russian wasn’t “classical” she was willing to become a contributor.
Antoinette spent her last days in the kind of surroundings she loved most, a cottage on the shores of Morse Pond, a beautiful lake at Wellesley, Massachusetts. The green surroundings reminded her of the Black Forest country of Germany where she one lived. She particularly admired a great pine tree standing between the porch and the lake. Some time ago a bolt of lightning ripped through the branches of this tree. After every storm Antoinette came out to see hour it had weathered the ordeal. But it always stood, sturdy and strong, ruggedly beautfiul despite the scars of time, wind and lightning.
Busy With Party Tasks
It was here that Antoinette Konikow died, busy with party tasks up to the very end.
Antoinette was not only a great teacher and leader of the Trotskyist movement. She was an Integral part of the Boston branch of the Socialist Workers Party. The members counted her as their closest friend and advisor. Most of them she had nurtured as budding revolutionary socialist politicians of the working class, and she took great personal interest in the development of each one. Her classes in speaking, in the principles of Marxism, and in the history of the movement gave most of the Boston comrades their first insight into Trotskyism.
No one saw through sham and pretense quicker than Antoinette. No one had more contempt for the traitors, the liars and the tyrants who occupy the high places. No one was more revolted than she over the medals showered by Stalin on his sycophants. But that did not prevent her from seeing the value of genuine leaders and of appreciation well earned. In fact she probably understood the pricelessness of these things all the more because she was a real iconoclast. One of the most moving incidents in her political life was her reaction to an autographed photograph and letter from Leon Trotsky on her Fiftieth Anniversary in the Marxist movement. In response to the tribute paid her by those present on the occasion, she responded:
Trotsky’s Warm Tribute
“The comrades have received me with warmth and friendship. It gives me tremendous happiness. The kind words written by Comrade Trotsky on his picture presented to me remind me of the greatest honor—the honor that was! —given to comrades in Russia, the Order of Lenin pinned upon their breasts. I feel as if Comrade Trotsky has pinned the Order of Trotsky on my breast! Not that I am a hero- worshipper—for I have helped to pull down too many heroes from their pedestals, But in the last ten years of darkness, of despair, the words of Leon Trotsky have been like a bell for a ship in distress, leading it to safe harbor.”

 



STALIN, An Appraisal of the Man and His Influence
by Leon Trotsky
Harper & Bros. New York. 516+xv pp. $5.00.
No other contemporary biography has assumed such political significance as Leon Trotsky’s biography of Stalin. For years it has been the source of international intrigue and struggle.
The Kremlin dictator had determined to murder the author long before the latter began working on this book in 1938. In each of the Moscow frame-up trials Leon Trotsky and his son Leon Sedov had figured as the main defendants and had been condemned in absentia. Stalin’s handpicked judges passed the death sentence; its execution was entrusted to his even more carefully selected assassins who redoubled their efforts when news came of the projected biography.
In May 1940, Trotsky’s home in Coyoacan, a suburb of Mexico City, was assaulted at night by a machine gun squad led by the Mexican painter Siqueiros. Failure attended this attempt to kill Trotsky and simultaneously to destroy his archives and manuscript by means of incendiary bombs. A few months later, on August 20, 1940, another hired assassin of Stalin did finally succeed in striking Trotsky down while the latter was at work on the manuscript.
Although the book was not completed, the text was in a form readily suitable for publication. Nevertheless the publication was deliberately delayed. After it came off the press in 1941, Harper and Brothers withdrew it, recalling even the review copies. It is no secret that this action was taken at the behest of the US State Department, which accorded many other similar diplomatic favors to the Kremlin during the war-time alliance.
Political motives underlie its release today to the public just as was the case in its suppression five years earlier. With the sharp worsening of relations between Washington and Moscow, the propagandists of American imperialism hope to use the crimes of Stalin in order to besmirch the October Revolution and further turn public opinion against the Soviet Union. But they will be sadly disappointed. None of Trotsky’s writings have ever served the ends of imperialist reaction, but on the contrary have unfailingly dealt the latter the heaviest blows.
Superficial observers and philistines have from the first tried to belittle the struggle between Stalin and Trotsky as a personal duel for power. In reality it was throughout an implacable conflict of two diametrically opposed systems of ideas: the ideas of progress and proletarian revolution versus those of reaction and counter-revolution.
In his 1937 summary speech before the Dewey Commission of Inquiry into the Moscow Trials, Trotsky explained as follows the respective roles of the two main protagonists in this struggle:
Neither Stalin nor I find ourselves in our present positions by accident. But we did not create these positions. Each of us is drawn into his drama as the representative of definite ideas and principles. In their turn, the ideas and principles did not fall from the sky, but have profound social roots. That is why one must take, not the psychological abstraction of Stalin as a “man,” but his concrete, historical personality as leader of the Soviet bureaucracy. One can understand the acts of Stalin only by starting from the conditions of existence of the new privileged stratum, greedy for material comforts, apprehensive for its positions, fearing the masses, and mortally hating all opposition.
These lines provide at the same time the criteria that guided Trotsky in writing Stalin. Prominent individuals in history, their role and character, can be correctly understood and analyzed primarily in terms of the social forces they serve, and, in the final analysis, personify. Trotsky, the foremost, most authoritative exponent and continuator of orthodox Marxism, rejected as false any other approach.
It is indeed impossible to comprehend Stalin’s role, particularly his meteoric rise to power, without understanding the exceptional and unrepeatable combination of historical factors that cleared the path for the future dictator.
As a politician Stalin belongs to a type by no means uncommon: Men of action, organically inclined toward adventurism and careerism. The most highly developed traits in such individuals are: An insatiable craving for power, strong will, perseverance and cunning coupled with a complete disregard for ideas, principles and loyalties.
These qualifications have sufficed for many a political career. But as a rule such individuals attain only subordinate positions except during periods which give rise, so to speak, to an unlimited social demand for political gangsterism. This demand arises during breaking-points in the historical process, periods of great historical transitions when rival social systems – the one outlived, the other about to be born – are engaged in mortal combat. The breed of political thugs becomes especially prolific in these periods of transition. This was the case, for example, during the transition from feudalism to capitalism (in particular, as Trotsky points out, the Renaissance era). We witness the same phenomenon in the epoch of the death agony of capitalism.
But even during transitional periods, political adventurers and thugs require additional qualifications to attain topflight prominence, namely: they must qualify as mass leaders. Here we touch one of the peculiarities in Stalin’s rise to power. While he belongs, generally speaking, to the same political type as Mussolini or Hitler, Stalin lacks a number of their unquestionable gifts, being neither an initiator of a mass movement, nor a talented agitator. As a matter of fact, Stalin’s most deeply rooted personal traits – “distrust of the masses, utter lack of imagination, short-sightedness, an inclination to follow the line of least resistance” – are precisely those which disqualify him for the role of mass leader. His rise, therefore, as Trotsky correctly points out, “is not comparable with anything in the past.” It is unique.
Its secret lies in the difference between the social base on which the reaction led by Stalin unfolded and the social base of the reactionary movements headed by Mussolini and Hitler. It was this that enabled Stalin to rise to power “not with the aid of personal qualities, but with the aid of an impersonal machine. And it was not he who created the machine, but the machine that created him.” The very traits in Stalin’s personality that rendered him unfit to lead the masses transformed him into an ideal leader of the rising counter-revolutionary Soviet bureaucracy.
The metamorphosis occurred not in full public view but behind the scenes: nor did it take place at a single stroke but in a number of stages over a period of years.
The pre-history of the Kremlin dictator is shrouded in deepest secrecy. Concurrently there is almost a quarter of a century’s encrustation of distortions and falsifications without parallel. Most of the material- – original and counterfeit alike – remained in the Soviet Union, either in the Kremlin’s vaults or long ago destroyed. Compelled to work abroad, in exile, Trotsky was obviously limited both with regard to his source material and his available staff of collaborators. For this reason he had to rely on his memory as eyewitness and participant in the decisive events, a course which he eschewed in his other historical writings.
This should not be taken to mean, however, that Stalin is based in part or as a whole on reminiscences. On the contrary, few contemporary biographies can match it in point of thoroughness, variety and richness of documentation. Let us note in passing that in this case as in all others, not one anti-Trotskyist reviewer has been able to refute a single reference or point to an instance of misuse of source material by Trotsky.
In marked contrast to the conditions under which this work was written is its great objectivity. We have here an almost detached view of a great mind analyzing step by step the process whereby human clay, not unmixed with dross, became converted into a prodigious idol – the idol in the Kremlin.
Joseph Djugashvilli – the future Stalin – was the son of a peasant shoemaker from Didi-Lilo, a little village in the Caucasus. The child’s earliest years were poisoned with hatred of his drunken, shiftless, despotic father; the predominant childhood influence was the young peasant mother who dreamed of her son’s rising in the world as a priest. This traditional aspiration of poor peasants, brought the adolescent Djugashvilli under the sway of petty clerical despots of the Tiflis theological seminary. Family and school instilled in the future dictator hatred of all authority. He rebelled.
His rebellion flowed initially into nationalist channels, a progressive development for a member of an oppressed nationality. The young theological student was thereupon swiftly caught up by the powerful revolutionary undertow in Czarist Russia, where not only anti-feudal but also anti-capitalist moods and ideas prevailed among the intellectual circles. The industrialization of a backward country and the rapid rise of a young proletariat created very fertile soil for the spread of Marxist ideas .which penetrated the bleak seminary walls many years before Joseph Djugashvilli enrolled there. That he accepted these ideas is evidenced by the severance of his connections with the seminary and his entry into the revolutionary movement. It is highly dubious, however, that he began as a Bolshevik, as the latter-day mythology claims. Early Czarist police records list him as a Menshevik. On such questions Czarist spies seldom erred.
In any case, there is no doubt whatever that Bolshevism attracted him and that he remained connected with Lenin’s party after once joining it. But what attracted him was not so much the consistency, Marxist orthodoxy and political intransigence of Bolshevism as the effectiveness and power of its organizational structure and methods.
This youth, even as a revolutionist, placed supreme confidence not in the masses but only in the machine. He lays bare his soul in one of his early appeals, broadcast in the province of Georgia during the 1905 revolution. The appeal concludes as follows:
Let us hold out our hands to each other and rally around our Party’s committees. We must not forget even for a minute that only the Party committees can worthily lead us, only they will light the way to the Promised Land ...
Committees remained his native element to the end.
Hatred and envy of the powerful turned Stalin into a revolutionist. He accepted the ideas of Bolshevism but never learned to feel them. They remained a sort of implantation, never penetrating into his blood and marrow. He could no more be in harmony with them than with the masses whose age-long struggles, aspirations and hopes these ideas, in the last analysis, express.
Trotsky demonstrates irrefutably that each time the masses entered the political arena, this provincial committeeman found himself completely out of his element, incapable of orientation, uneasy, unsure, groping blindly and straying time and again politically into the camp of the ideological opponents of Bolshevism. Concurrently, he found himself shunted aside not only by individuals of greater stature but also those with far lesser abilities.
Conversely, periods of reaction, when the masses ceased to lead political lives, became the major signposts in his career. During these periods he advanced most rapidly, landing finally in 1912 on the top Party committee. The specific weight of a political machine grows in proportion with the weakening of the mass movement. Trotsky demonstrates how closely Stalin’s career parallels the operation of this political law, until it finally propelled him to undreamed-of heights.
For Stalin to rise to undisputed power two conditions had to be fulfilled: first, the revolutionist in him had to be killed; second, he had to destroy Lenin’s party. This is precisely what happened.
Trotsky writes:
If Stalin could have foreseen at the very beginning where his fight against Trotskyism would lead, he undoubtedly would have stopped short, in spite of the prospect of victory over all his opponents. But he did not foresee anything.
Trotsky said virtually the same thing at the very beginning of the struggle against Stalinism in 1923.
The social base of the counter-revolution in the Soviet Union dictated that it be led by an individual with a reputation of an old revolutionist. Stalin possessed this deserved reputation. But his personal shortcomings prevented him from ever playing a leading role in Lenin’s lifetime. This deficiency had to be remedied at all costs.
Hence a new biography was supplied by an army of liars and counterfeiters. According to these forged credentials Stalin appears as the co-builder of the Bolshevik Party, Lenin’s right hand man in the period of October, chief figure in the Civil War, savior of Petrograd and Tsaritsin (renamed Stalingrad after Lenin died), etc., etc.
Trotsky demolishes this monolithic lie by restoring some of the salient historical facts. (To restore all would have required a score of volumes.) To cite a few:
Stalin played a dismal role during the 1917 revolution. Together with Kamenev he flirted with the Conciliators, advocated unity with the Mensheviks, supported the Provisional Government. He reoriented himself with difficulty only after Lenin’s arrival in Petrograd.
He played no important part whatever in the Petrograd insurrection, for which he himself once gave the credit to Trotsky.
His record during the Civil War was likewise less than heroic. His fraudulent claim to having “saved” Petrograd rests on the flimsy coincidence that he happened to be in that city in May 1919 when Yudenich launched his first sally with negligible forces and was easily repelled. The real threat to Petrograd came in October of the same year, when Yudenich attacked, for the second time, in force and was repelled. This event is connected with the name of Trotsky and not of Stalin who was hundreds of miles away at the time.
Similarly the “epic” of Tsaritsin will hardly withstand close scrutiny. Stalin did spend several months there in 1918 while on a mission to secure badly-needed food-stuffs (which he failed to obtain); his military activities were of such a nature that he had to be removed (on the categorical insistence of Trotsky).
Stalin’s chief operations during the Civil War consisted of behind-the-scenes intrigues, with the aim of inciting the so-called Military Opposition (proponents of guerrilla armies and guerrilla warfare) against Trotsky’s program of systematically building the Red Army and utilizing the former Czarist officers.
The number of similar facts and episodes can be extended almost indefinitely.
 
Stalin’s Rise to Prominence
Stalin’s rise to prominence began in 1923 when Lenin lay on his deathbed. Trotsky adduces weighty evidence in support of his conclusion that Lenin was given poison by Stalin. The latter moreover, had ample motives for so doing: Lenin had broken all personal relations with him, and was preparing to crush him politically.
Despite the somber and sometimes sinister subject, the biography is by no means wholly negative. Its main setting is the background of the development of the Russian revolution. Entire sections of the book are devoted to an exposition of the different phases through which the revolutionary movement passed. Among the invaluable material there is data, most of it available for the first time in English, relating to the history of the Bolshevik Party, the period of the October Revolution, the Civil War, the building of the Red Army, etc. Throughout the book, Trotsky gives brilliant and intimate sketches of many outstanding personalities in the Bolshevik movement, Lenin’s collaborators and disciples.
Even the fragmentary sections in the supplement (The Thermidorian Reaction and Kinto in Power) will greatly aid the reader who is interested in understanding the social process and moods that accompanied the initial phases of the degeneration of the Soviet Union.
Contained in the appendix is an exceptionally important theoretical document, The Three Concepts of the Russian Revolution. It is Trotsky’s definitive exposition of the differences between the views of Bolshevism and Menshevism on the development of the Russian Revolution and his own points of agreement and disagreement with Lenin on this question. Involved here is the application of the famous theory of the permanent revolution to the peculiar Russian conditions. Trotsky originally intended to include it in his work on Lenin which he began during his exile in Norway but was never able to complete.
It is necessary to briefly comment in passing on the scandalous conduct of Charles Malamuth who figures as “editor” of the book. He had been hired solely as translator of the book. Instead of preparing the uncompleted text for publication as the author had left it, he arbitrarily proceeded to interpolate passages directly counter to Trotsky’s own ideas, among them the cynical contention that Stalinism is the inevitable outcome of Bolshevism. It goes without saying that one of the main objects of the author was to demonstrate just the contrary.
The reviews accorded this book by the bourgeois press were without exception hostile. The favorite method was to belittle it as “intensely personal.” To be sure not a single one of these impartial gentlemen bothered to adduce an instance of Trotsky’s alleged subjectivity, let alone challenge any of the factual material in the book.
Trotsky, of course, is not passionless. His book is one of the most annihilating indictments in history of an individual. It is at the same time an impassioned defense of the struggle for socialism.
Although the author is dead, Wall Street and all its apologists still fear his fundamental ideas. They are afraid, because in this book as in all his writings, Trotsky presents his analysis of the crisis in the world today and points to the revolutionary way out for the masses. They are afraid of the bright light this book sheds on the building of the revolutionary party.
What makes these creatures recoil in horror should attract every serious worker and youth interested in revolutionary socialist ideas.
This book will take its place among the great Marxist classics not simply as a brilliant biography but as a powerful weapon in the struggle for the communist future of man.







This is the first in a series of articles that The Militant will carry in connection with the publication of Leon Trotsky’s biography of Stalin.



Few biographies have created the sensation aroused by the release of Stalin to the public. The reason for this and for the importance attached to this book can be fully understood only in the light of all the circumstances surrounding it. Years before the book itself reached the hands of the readers it had already become the center of vast international intrigue and struggle.
Who was more qualified to write a biography of the Kremlin dictator than Trotsky? In addition to his great literary gifts, his exceptional objectivity and his unquestioned ability to interpret events and individuals, Leon Trotsky brought to this work the knowledge of an eyewitness and a direct participant in the decisive events that shaped Stalin’s entire career.
Trotsky was the lone survivor abroad of the entire generation of Lenin’s leading collaborators. That is why Stalin feared him so; that is why he lamented in public that he had made a “mistake” in agreeing to exile Trotsky to Turkey in 1929.
Trotsky knew the truth about Stalin’s role in the counter-revolution in the USSR and was able to tell it better than anyone else. Stalin reached his decision to murder Trotsky long before the latter began working on this book. As a matter of fact, one of the reasons for staging the infamous Moscow frameups of 1936–38, in which Trotsky and his son Sedov figured as the principal defendants, was to prepare politically for the subsequent assassinations of both.
 
Try to Burn Archives
When the news reached the Kremlin that Trotsky had begun work on Stalin, the GPU redoubled its activities. They spared no efforts to destroy not only the author but also his archives and the manuscript. The GPU machine-gun squad that assaulted Trotsky’s home in Mexico on the night of May 24, 1940 tried to set his library on fire with incendiary bombs.
Trotsky was hastening to complete the manuscript, and was actually at work on it when the GPU assassin finally struck him down on August 20, 1940.
But while Stalin succeeded in preventing Trotsky from finishing the book, he was unable to destroy it. The most important sections dealing with Stalin’s real role in the Bolshevik movement prior to and during the Russian revolution, were completed. This part of Stalin’s past is one of the Kremlin bureaucracy’s most jealously guarded secrets. Stalin has for years sought to eradicate every trace of it. Documents and books in the USSR relating to this period have been systematically destroyed, and countless others falsified.
 
Book Recalled
The remaining part of Stalin (beginning with chapter VII) was left unfinished, but nevertheless in suitable form for publication. Harper and Brothers arbitrarily decided, however, that the man hired to translate the book should “edit” it. Whereupon the translator proceeded to interpolate material into the unfinished chapters. The views in some of these interpolations run directly counter to Trotsky’s own ideas.
After thus tampering with the text, the publishers then announced its publication in the fall of 1941. But it was not released. Even the review copies, already sent out, were recalled. This was one of the many favors that Roosevelt and the State Department accorded at the time to their “ally” in the Kremlin. Just as there were political motives for the suppression of Stalin in 1941, so, too, the break-up of the wartime alliance between Moscow and Washington permits the publishers to release the book in 1946.
Trotsky’s treatment of Stalin’s life has been subjected to attack by both capitalist critics and spokesmen for the Kremlin. The capitalist reviewers assail the book because its author personifies the Russian and world socialist revolution, and in his ideas defends the interests of the workers against all their enemies and misleaders.
The task of the Stalinist agents is to lie, slander and vilify the biography just as they lied, slandered and vilified its author when he was alive. Stalin must try to cast a shadow over the book because even from a purely factual standpoint it contains material highly damaging to the fraudulent biography the Kremlin despot has manufactured for himself.
While the Daily Worker as yet remains studiously silent, the work of defamation is being carried on, for the time being, by journalistic prostitutes who assume the pose of impartial observers. We will deal in detail with this two-front attack by the capitalist and GPU reviewers in a subsequent article.
 
Valuable History
The book is valuable not only from the standpoint of the data it contains on Stalin and Stalinism but also from the standpoint of the history of the Bolshevik Party. Before he began working on Stalin, Trotsky had been engaged in preparing a biography of Lenin. Because of its relevancy, Trotsky transferred a great deal of the material intended for use in that latter volume into the work on Stalin. In point of content it is the most brilliant product of Trotsky’s pen.
This outstanding biography in Marxist literature is, by a savage irony of history, the biography of the most abysmal betrayer of Marxism.
Stalin deserves the attention of every serious worker who is interested in the struggle for socialism. It casts an illuminating light on the real issues in the struggle between Trotsky and Stalin. This struggle was not at all a personal feud but a life and death duel between two diametrically opposed systems of ideas. What separates these two systems of ideas is the class struggle. Trotsky remained on the workers’ side of the barricade; Stalin deserted to the class enemy. Precisely for this reason this biography constitutes a powerful political weapon for the class-conscious workers.
 




Last week Wall Street’s deliberate, cynical and ruthless campaign to prepare public opinion in this country for the outbreak of the Third World War moved into high gear with the convening of the so-called “United Nations” Security Council in Hunter College, New York City, on Monday, March 25.
The stage was set with the ballyhoo, lavishness and care that Hollywood reserves for the super-colossal productions. Nothing was overlooked in order to build up the fraudulent solemnity and “drama” of the occasion.
 
Blare of Publicity
Every trivial detail – the rose-colored hall, the chairman’s shining mahogany desk, the semi-oval conference table, etc., etc. – everything was played up amid the blare of publicity and the glare of floodlights. The American imperialists do not propose to miss a single trick as they speed up their entire vast propaganda machine.
The press, the radio, the pulpit, the newsreels and every other visual and oral medium of influencing the human mind worked In unison aiming and hitting at one and the same target, namely: the USSR – via the pitiful plight of poor “little Iran.”
To be sure, among themselves the real directors of this “war of nerves” do not hesitate to assay the Iranian question as a detail. Thus, on March 31, the N.Y. Times, the most authoritative organ of U.S. imperialism carried an article under the heading: “MAIN PEACE PROBLEMS WILL COME APTER IRAN.” In plain language this means that no matter how the Iran issue is resolved, it actually solves nothing fundamental in the relations between the Big Three.
The Times article blandly dismisses Iran as an “accident of time.” But it adds in the same breath that “Iran is of course the most dramatic and vital of today’s troubles.” Why so? Why should any “accident” dominate “main problems?” The explanation for this is not difficult to find.
All capitalist regimes, which rest on violence and deception, “have at their disposal only a limited stock of political ideas, however much “democratic” imperialists may perfect their political techniques and vary the forms, the political substance of their war preparations remains monotonously the same.
 
Substance Same
It wasn’t so very long ago that a similar cry was heard about “poor little Finland.” And before that – over “defenseless Poland.” And in 1914, it was “poor little Belgium.” In this sphere they can invent nothing more effective. In their contempt for the masses these warmongers invariably rely a great deal on the shortness of human memory. Hence the current beating of the war drums around “poor little Iran.”
Could there be a more obscene spectacle than that of a spokesman of American imperialism – today trampling throughout the world the right of peoples to self- determination – cast in the role of champion of the rights of “little nations,” and in particular Iran? But Wall Street’s representatives are brazen enough to top even this. For in the sessions, of the Security Council, figuring in this role has been none other than Secretary of State Byrnes. He is one of the Southern Bourbons, one of the avowed oppressors of the colored racial minority at home. Obviously, these warmongers feel free to get away with anything.
 
Instrument of War
They are flushed with unprecedented victories and unparalleled power. No other imperialism in history ever enjoyed such overwhelming preponderance, up to and including their present monopoly of atomic weapons. They possess an additional advantage in having, for their war preparations, the sounding board of a “world organization” – the UNO. They and their spokesmen can thus pretend to speak not alone in their own name but in the name of “51 nations.” It is hardly surprising therefore that they have chosen the UNO as one of the principal instruments and covers for preparing World War III.
No viler crime can be committed against the American people and the peoples of the world, no greater aid can at this time be given the warmongers than to paint up the UNO or spread any illusions about it and its war role. Yet who is in the forefront spreading such illusions?
Every one of the wretched diplomatic subterfuges of Gromyko, the Kremlin’s representative, has played the game of the warmakers. From his initial attempt on Monday to exclude Iran from the agenda on grounds of procedure, through the equally impotent dodge on Tuesday of trying to postpone it, to the action of walking out on Wednesday from the Security Council – his moves have provided the best means of heightening the “tension” and the “drama” and thus making it easy to stir up interest and put across the war propaganda. In summing up last week’s sessions, the N.Y. Times noted with satisfaction: “Day by day the drama mounted.”
 
Stalin’s Course
Gromyko, however, was only following orders. If by his actions he builds up the prestige of the UNO and the grisly farce enacted in its name, it is because such is Stalin’s course.
On the eve of the current sessions, Stalin endorsed the UNO as a “valuable instrument of preservation of peace and international security.” He has since then, in the midst of the “walkout,” supplemented his verbal endorsement with the action of paying the full year’s dues to the UNO.
Stalin still hopes to cheat history by striking a deal with Washington, and in the process deals blow upon blow to the security of the USSR and of civilization as a whole.
 




On December 23, 1945, in the city of Pittsburgh I concluded a national tour, covering more than a score of cities in a period of approximately three and a half months. In the course of such a tour one naturally gathers a great many impressions. But from the outset, what struck me most forcibly was the tremendous vitality and the great and growing attractive power of American Trotskyism, the Socialist Workers Party.
From their very first contact with our movement, an indelible imprint is left on workers’ minds by the spirit of Trotskyists. In virtually every city I heard appreciative comments from workers, singling out our spirit. And this is indeed the hallmark of our movement. The spirit is the same everywhere, in branches both large and small, in areas where we have deep roots as well as those where we are just breaking ground. Everywhere – the same enthusiasm, the same confidence, devotion, selflessness, seriousness, indefatigable perseverance, loyalty.
In his History of American Trotskyism, Comrade Cannon reported that in the course of the May, 1934, strikes in Minneapolis the workers locally became convinced that “these Trotskyists mean business. When they undertake anything, they go through with it.” I can vouch from my personal experience that this same sentiment is today being expressed by more and more workers on a national scale.
“Yes, you Trotskyists mean business!” I heard this on the lips of workers from one end of the country to the other. Many of these workers had never attended a working-class political meeting before, let alone a Trotskyist meeting. The spirit of our movement and this conviction in the workers’ minds concerning our seriousness invests the Socialist Workers Party with great moral authority.
 
Steady Influx
It explains in large measure the steady influx of workers into our ranks. In locality after locality we have doubled, trebled and even quadrupled our membership within the last 1–2 months, with far greater perspectives of growth still ahead.
The attractive power of our party finds its physical expression as well. Thus, centrally-located, well-kept and efficiently run headquarters are the rule, not the exception.
The growth of our movement, especially the leaps it is now taking in many localities, has posed the need of new and bigger headquarters. This problem of "growing pains,” noted by Comrade Grace Carlson on her tour (which preceded mine by a couple of months) has become acute in several places, particularly in the Michigan-Ohio area and on the West Coast.
The real source of our party’s spirit and great attractive power is not at all hard to fix. It lies above all in the party’s social composition, which is overwhelmingly proletarian as a whole, and especially in its leading cadres. Many of the outstanding white and colored worker-militants in the country’s basic industries are already in our ranks. Many more are gravitating towards us and will join us in the near future. It was my privilege to meet and discuss with several thousand of them.
The secret of the attractiveness, growth and success of Lenin’s Bolshevik Party in Russia lay in this, that it was a party of workers. The same thing applies to the Socialist Workers Party which is continuing the policy and practice of Lenin and Trotsky in the United States today.
 
Trotskyist Youth
Parallel with the growing influx of workers into our ranks is the gravitation of the youth toward Trotskyism. On the coast, especially in Los Angeles, we now have important and sizeable youth formations. We have a similar development in the East, and promising beginnings throughout the country.
I know of very few occasions in the history of the labor movement when it was possible for young girls and boys to obtain revolutionary training under such favorable conditions as those now offered by our movement. My impression is that the Trotskyist youth is both aware and appreciative of this. And this is an additional reason why they are true party patriots.
Among the noteworthy things about our party membership, both adult and youth, is that we are rooted not only in the basic industries but in the localities. We have many “hometown” members. It will not be so easy as was the case in the past for professional red-baiters to raise the hue and cry about “imported” radicals and "foreign” ideas in trying to combat the spread of Trotskyism.
And now, a word about The Militant. My experiences on the tour brought sharply home the prestige and influence of this swiftly growing national workers’ weekly. The workers are proud of The Militant, and justly so. The most common reference among workers is to “my paper,” and that paper invariably turns out to be – The Militant. It is playing a major role in the class struggle generally and in the growth of our movement in particular; it is destined to play a far greater one in the immediate future.
 
Great Changes
At the conclusion of her tour in September 1945 Grace Carlson noted:
“Great changes are taking place in the United States, particularly in the habits of thought of the American workers. They are losing faith in American capitalism.”
My observations a brief few months later enable me to corroborate this conclusion. Larger and larger sections of American workers are beginning to look with disfavor upon the regime of the Richest Sixty Families and their agents. The advanced elements are already in process of making the transition from a purely negative attitude toward capitalism to a positive standpoint in favor of socialism.
In this process the Socialist Workers Party is fulfilling the role of a polarizing agent. We are now absorbing by the scores workers without previous working-class political affiliation. These scores today are the harbingers of hundreds and thousands on the morrow.
Confidence in our future imbues the ranks, from the old- timers to the newest recruits. In its turn, this confidence is the best guarantee of the victory of our cause – the cause of socialism – in the United States.
 



All of Leon Trotsky’s basic teachings are concentrated in the major task of his lifetime’s activity – the building of the Fourth International.
For an entire decade – 1923-1933 – he struggled to reform the Third International, which he had founded together with Lenin. When Stalinism paved the way for Hitler’s assumption of power in Germany; when this betrayal passed over the heads of the completely degenerated Stalinized parties, history itself proved irrefutably that the Third International was beyond reform. It died ignominiously as had the Second International before it. What died with these old Internationals was not revolutionary Marxism, but two virtually duplicate sets of false ideas and practices – nationalism, opportunism, reformism. In brief, petty-bourgeois adaptation to capitalism and capitulation to it. A new International became necessary. As Trotsky tirelessly repeated, this was – and is – the basic task of our epoch. It was to this task that he devoted his best energies and the last years of his life.
For Trotsky, the building of the Fourth International was least of all a question of abstract theory or of an “organizational form.” He heaped scorn upon all those who posed the issue in this manner, because such an approach stands everything on its head. Trotsky saw that the world party of the working class is first of all a closely knit system of ideas, that is to say, a program. On no other basis is it possible to train, temper and fuse the proletarian vanguard internationally and nationally. From the given system of ideas – or program – flows a corresponding system of strategic, tactical and organizational methods. The latter have no independent meaning or existence of their own and are subordinate to the former.
One of Trotsky’s favorite sayings was: “It is not the party that makes the program; it is the program that makes the party.”
Precisely because of this primary stress on program, Trotsky’s decade of struggle to reform the Third International became in the most direct sense the preparation for the Fourth International.
This approach – and it is the only correct one – obviously invests ideas with extraordinary importance. Indeed we can say without any fear of exaggeration than none attach greater significance or power to ideas than do the revolutionary Marxists. Like Marx, Engels and Lenin, Trotsky regarded ideas as the greatest power in the world.
Lenin’s Bolshevik Party valued its ideas as its most potent weapon. Bolshevism demonstrated in action, in 1917, that such ideas, once embraced by the masses, become converted into an insuperable material force.
Here is how Trotsky formulated this approach in a personal letter to James P. Cannon:
We work with the most correct and powerful ideas in the world, with inadequate numerical forces and material means. But correct ideas, in the long run, always conquer and make available for themselves the necessary material means and forces.
Trotsky’s ideas derive their power from the same source as Lenin’s: both are the correct expression of the struggle of living forces, first and foremost of the liberationist struggle of the proletariat. They represent not only the product of profound theoretical analysis (without which it is impossible to understand reality) but also the unassailable deductions from the march of history for the last hundred years (that is to say, from 1848 when Marx and Engels first expounded the laws governing the movement of capitalist society).
There are ideas and ideas. As against the correct ideas of Marxism, there is also the power of the false ideas. The former serve the interests of progress, of the world working class; the latter only play into the hands of reaction and deal untold injury to workers all the oppressed and to society as a whole. False ideas, like correct ones, do not fall from the sky. They, too, express one of the living forces engaged in struggle, namely: the camp of the counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie.
Like Lenin, Trotsky rejected the notion that the policies of opportunist tendencies represented merely mistakes in “theory.” Theory is scarcely involved in the policy of the treacherous “Socialists,” who each time base themselves on the current needs of propping up the rule of decaying capitalism. Theory has even less to do with the Kremlin’s policy, which is each time determined by practical needs of safeguarding the privileges and power of the ruling clique. Fear of the proletarian revolution has long ago converted both the moribund Second and Third Internationals into agencies of world imperialism. Hence flows the necessity of an irreconcilable attitude towards them. For the first condition for unifying the workers is a complete break with all the agencies, direct or indirect, of the bourgeoisie.
The basic plank of a revolutionary program is – internationalism. Mere acceptance of “internationalism” is hollow mockery unless accompanied in practice by complete rejection of nationalist policies, in whatever guise they may manifest themselves. It was precisely against the nationalist deviations of the Soviet bureaucracy, most crassly expressed by Stalin’s theory of “socialism in one country,” that Trotsky launched his life-and-death struggle against Stalinism. He warned that the adoption of Stalin’s theory would imperceptibly but inescapably shunt the Third International onto the tracks of opportunism.
This warning was swiftly verified by events. In England during the critical period of the labor movement in 1925-27, the Stalinists followed a false and opportunist policy (the policy of the Anglo-Russian Committee). In China the Stalinists betrayed the revolution of 1925-27 by pursuing a typical Menshevik policy of collaborating with the native bourgeoisie (Stalin’s bloc of “four classes”), in the name of establishing not workers’s rule but the “democratic dictatorship of workers and peasants.” In the Soviet Union, Stalin’s false policies manifested themselves at the time in an opportunist economic policy (slow tempo of industrialization, fostering of neo-capitalist elements: “kulak grow rich,” etc.) and subsequently in the adventuristic economic policy in connection with the First Five-Year Plan.
The great lessons of these experiences in China, the USSR and England were the axis of the struggle inside the Russian party, and they later became the basis for the education and unification of the original world Trotskyist movement.
Internationalism became the very hall-mark of Trotskyism. Writing in 1938, on the Ninetieth Anniversary of the Communist Manifesto, Trotsky said:
The international development of capitalism has predetermined the international character of the proletarian revolution. “United action, of the leading civilized countries at least, is one of the first conditions for the emancipation of the proletariat,” [wrote Marx and Engels in 1848]. The subsequent development of capitalism has so closely knit all sections of our planet, both “civilized” and “uncivilized,” that the problem of the socialist revolution has completely and decisively assumed a world character. The Soviet bureaucracy attempted to liquidate the Manifesto with respect to this fundamental question. The Bonapartist degeneration of the Soviet state is an overwhelming illustration of the falseness of the theory of socialism in one country.
 
The Elaboration of an International Program
Trotsky’s primary objective from the outset was to elaborate an internationalist program, and to select groups and individuals on this programmatic foundation. No sooner were his hands untied for work on a world scale (by his exile to Turkey in February 1929), than he began hammering home the cardinal consideration that whoever assigns a secondary importance to the international factor is travelling on the road to national opportunism. “National programs can be built only on international ground.” “Our international orientation and our national policy are indissolubly bound together.”
“It is undeniable,” he explained, “that each country possesses the greatest peculiarities of its own. But in our epoch their true value can be estimated, and revolutionary use can be made of them only from an internationalist point of view. Only an international organization can be the bearer of an international ideology.”
Trotsky’s touchstone for evaluating “tendencies in world communism” – and therefore his touchstone for political collaboration – was: the position taken by any given group on the above-listed three questions which he designated as “classic” (Anglo-Russian Committee, Chinese revolution of 1925-27, Soviet economic policy in conjunction with the theory of socialism in one country). In his opinion only an organization which demarcated itself ideologically from all others on these issues, could prove viable, capable of action, capable of withstanding the test of events, and finally able to unite the proletariat under its banner.
Why? Because in each case fundamental principles of revolutionary policy were involved. Agreement meant the possibility for joint work within a common organization; disagreement either excluded such a possibility or rendered it extremely remote.
While attaching paramount importance to questions of principle, Trotsky invariably subordinated questions of tactic, organization and the like. In March 31, 1929, in the same letter in which he lists the “three classic questions” as the decisive criteria, he adds the following highly illuminating comment:
Some comrades may be astonished that I omit reference here to the question of the party regime. I do so not out of oversight, but deliberately. A party regime has no independent, self-sufficient meaning. In relation to party policy it is a derivative magnitude. The most heterogeneous elements sympathize with the struggle against Stalinist bureaucratism ... For a Marxist, democracy within a party or within a country is not an abstraction. Democracy is always conditioned by the struggle of living forces. By bureaucratism, the opportunist elements in part and as a whole understand revolutionary centralism. Obviously, they cannot be our co-thinkers.
Of no less significance is Trotsky’s refusal not only to unite but even to effect blocs with the Right wing, even though at the time it was a tendency within the Communist movement. This is an important lesson in principled politics. Only unprincipled politicians enter into political collaboration with those with whom they disagree fundamentally, but with whom they happen to have temporary agreement on secondary issues. Trotsky was unyielding on this score.
In March 1929 he wrote:
Two irreconcilably opposed tendencies are usually listed under the label of opposition: the revolutionary tendency [the Trotskyists] and the opportunist tendency [Bukharin-Brandler-Lovestone wing]. A hostile attitude toward centrism [the reference here is to Stalinism] and toward the “regime” is the only thing they have in common. But this is a purely negative bond. Our struggle against centrism derives from the fact that centrism is semi-opportunist and covers up full-blown opportunism, despite temporary and sharp disagreements with the latter. For this reason there cannot even be talk of a bloc between the Left Opposition and the Right Opposition. This requires no commentary.
Trotsky safeguarded the movement from being converted into a melting pot of divergent ideological tendencies not only by a principled and serious attitude toward unifications but also by a similar attitude toward splits.
During the same period he wrote:
It is not always, nor under all circumstances, that unity within an organization must remain inviolate. In cases where the differences assume a fundamental character, a split at times appears to be the only solution possible. But care must be taken that this be a genuine split, that is, that the split should not depart from the line of principled differences, and that this line be brought clear-cut before the eyes of all the members of the organization.
In the first seven years of its existence the Left Opposition experienced approximately a score of splits. The political opponents seized upon this with glee as proof of an intolerable “internal regime.”
Trotsky dismissed this contention with contempt, pointing out that “it is necessary to take not the bald statistics of splits, but the dialectics of development.” A movement irreconcilably defending its program against opportunism, against centrism, against ultra-leftism could not have possibly avoided splits under the most favorable conditions, and all the less so in the period of catastrophic defeats and universal disorientation of the labor movement.
Beginning with 1930 a whole series of splits occurred over the constantly recurring differences relating to the class nature of the Soviet Union. If in 1939-40 this issue precipitated the struggle inside the Socialist Workers Party, then in 1930, at the very inception of the European movement, it led to a break with Urbahns in Germany, Louzon in France, Overstraaten in Belgium, etc.
When the turn from propaganda groups to mass work was launched in 1934-36, another series of splits occurred in France, England, the U.S. and elsewhere over the tactic of entry into the Socialist parties where left wing tendencies were crystallizing (the famous “French Turn”).
But precisely because the movement had a banner and a program from which it refused to swerve, it was able to overcome each internal crisis and to forge steadily, even if slowly, forward.
 
Trotsky’s Struggle for the International
Parallel with Trotsky’s irreconcilability in defending the internationalist principles of the movement was his adamant insistence upon the necessity and primacy of the international organization. “Only an international organization can be the bearer of an international ideology.” The organization form flows from and must correspond to the party’s platform.
From the outset, he insisted on the speediest possible consolidation of all his genuine co-thinkers into an international body. “From its first steps,” he wrote in February 1930, “the Opposition must therefore clearly declare itself as an international faction – as did the Communists in the period of the Communist Manifesto, or of the First International, or of the Left Zimmerwald at the beginning of the war (1914-18) ... In the epoch of imperialism, a similar attitude imposes itself a hundred times more categorically than in the times of Marx.”
This conception of party building was hotly disputed and opposed by all the varieties of centrism who favored a “broader,” more “all-inclusive” organization. In practically every country in Europe, especially France, voices were raised in favor of the more accommodating perspective. Their fundamental criterion for political collaboration was as simple as it was false: opposition to Stalinism. These people sought to operate in politics much after the manner of those who strike up close personal friendships solely on the basis of mutual and pet dislikes. Trotsky fought the centrist trends implacably. For example, in answer to Paz and Treint, the French champions of an “all-inclusive” organization, he wrote:
They dream of creating an international association which will be open to everybody: those who support Chiang Kai-shek and those who support the Soviet Republic [in the 1930 conflict over the Manchurian railway]; those who endeavor to save the “autonomy” of the industrial unions from Communism as well as those who struggle for the influence of Communism in the trade unions; those who are for a united front with the Right wing groups [the Bukharin wing in Russia; the Brandlerites in Germany; the Lovestoneites in the U.S., etc.] against the official party as well as those who are for a united front with the official party against the Right wing groups. This program for a melting-pot is being advanced under the slogan of “party democracy.” Could any one invent a more malicious mockery of party democracy?
Trotsky’s criteria for the building of the International, it will be observed, were not at all based on purely negative bonds. What he invariably sought was not unity for unity’s sake, but unity based on community of ideas. No selection was worthwhile in his opinion unless it was a selection of co-thinkers animated by common basic views, by the same fundamental principles.
This was Trotsky’s position during the years when the movement functioned as a faction of the Third International; this remained his position after 1933 when the movement turned to the task of building the Fourth International. The English ILP, the German SAP and others then came to the fore with proposals for a new melting pot. Trotsky rejected an “all-inclusive” International just as he had previously rejected an “all-inclusive” international faction. In the five years that elapsed between the issuance of the call for the Fourth International and its Founding Congress in 1938, the centrists played out to the fullest measure their experiment of creating a “broad,” “non-sectarian,” “non-dogmatic” International organization. Their catch-all International, the London Bureau, otherwise known as the “International Bureau of Revolutionary Socialist Unity” – a pretentious body, without a banner, without a program, was a conglomeration of parties and groups moving simultaneously in all directions. As Trotsky predicted, it fell apart without leaving a trace.
The Norwegian Labor Party of Tranmael broke with the London Bureau and entered the capitalist government of Norway. The Swedish Socialist Party, one of the original mainstays, had found its way back into the embraces of the Social Democracy; the German SAP travelled in the same direction. The Brandler-Lovestone “international” that adhered to the Bureau in its heyday simply dissolved. The splinter exile groups (the Italian Maximalists and the Austrian Red Front “lefts”) gave up the ghost. The ILP, the lone survivor of this galaxy, continued to vegetate.

The early splits in the Trotskyist movement which we have already recounted were in reality only anticipations of the two subsequent struggles upon the outcome of which the very fate of the International depended.
The first of these came in connection with the Spanish Civil War which erupted in 1936; the second coincided with the outbreak of the Second World War.
The internal crisis in connection with the Spanish Civil War was precipitated by the following developments:
Under the leadership of Andres Nin the majority of Spanish Trotskyist section merged with the semi-nationalist Catalan Federation of Maurin. The product of this fusion was the POUM (Party of Marxist Unity) with a typically centrist program. This sacrifice of principles for the sake of “unity” led unavoidably to disastrous results. The POUM was not a revolutionary party at all, but like its prototypes merely gave the appearance of being one. It began its career by engaging in electoral maneuvers with the Spanish People’s Front and ended by the entry of Nin into the bourgeois government, that is to say, by the commission of the greatest crime of all in a period of the socialist revolution.
The policies of the POUM were supported not only by the London Bureau, to which it was affiliated, but met with widespread sympathy among revolutionary workers throughout the world. As a matter of fact, there were illusions about the POUM within the ranks of the Trotskyists.
A break with the POUM implied swimming against the stream, including broad sections of class-conscious workers. Trotsky did not hesitate. He did not change his course.
In January 1936, after the POUM entered into an electoral bloc with the Spanish People’s Front, Trotsky branded its course as treachery, and added in conclusion:
As far as we are concerned we prefer clarity. In Spain, genuine revolutionists will no doubt be found who will mercilessly expose the betrayal of Maurin, Nin, Andrade and Co., and lay the foundation for the Spanish section of the Fourth International.
Franco’s assault came in July 1936. The POUM did not effect a change in its policy, but slid further and further on its false and perfidious course. Trotsky continued to criticise and oppose. The subsequent fate of the POUM bore out his position to the hilt. It is hardly necessary to point out that had a different policy been followed, the Fourth International would have assumed responsibility for the terrible defeat in Spain and would have been, in consequence, badly compromised.
 
Trotsky’s Break With Sneevliet
Among the organizations that sided with the POUM was the Revolutionary Socialist Workers Party of Holland (RSAP) which under the leadership of Sneevliet and Schmidt was one of the signatories to the August 1935 call for the Fourth International. Trotsky remained firm, even though this meant a break with one of the largest mass parties affiliated to the Trotskyist movement at the time.
Despite this grave internal crisis, and without the RSAP, it became nevertheless possible by September 1938 to convene the Founding Conference of the Fourth International.
Less than a year later, in July 1939, Trotsky was able to declare:
The international organization of Brandler, Lovestone, etc., which appeared to be many times more powerful than our organizations has crumbled to dust. The alliance between Walcher and the Norwegian Labor Party and Pivert himself (leader of PSOP, a French counterpart of the Spanish POUM) burst into fragments. The London Bureau has given up the ghost. But the Fourth International, despite all the difficulties and crises, has grown uninterruptedly, has its own organizations in more than a score of countries, and was able to convene its World Congress under the most difficult circumstances ...
The movement could derive this inner drive and power from one source, and one source only – its unassailable ideas, its correct and tested program. This is how Trotsky explained it in July 1939:
The Fourth International is developing as a grouping of new and fresh elements on the basis of a common program growing out of the entire past experience, incessantly checked and rendered more precise. In the selection of its cadres the Fourth International has great advantages over the Third. These advantages flow precisely from the difficult conditions of struggle in the epoch of reaction. The Third International took shape swiftly because many “Lefts” easily and readily adhered to the victorious revolution. The Fourth International takes form under the blows of defeats and persecutions. The ideological bond created under such conditions is extraordinarily firm.
Within a few months after writing these lines, Trotsky was to engage in and lead, for the last time in his lifetime, another decisive struggle for the program and tradition of the Fourth International. This was the 1939-40 struggle aaginst the petty-bourgeois opposition within the SWP. Involved here was still another attempt to revise and overthrow the colossal conquest of the revolutionary vanguard – its theory, its political principles, its organizational ideas and practices. Precisely because of its scope, the 1939-40 struggle recapitulated the essential features of all the preceding struggles.
The extraordinary firmness of the ideological bond that binds the movement created by Trotsky has been decisively confirmed by the emergence of a stronger and more homogeneous Fourth International out of the fiery test of World War II. What safeguards its future is the very same thing that has safeguarded its past, namely: it is being built in the same way and with the same ideas and methods that Trotsky taught all his co-thinkers.



Sunday, October 20, will be remembered as Black Sunday by the entire Soviet technical and administrative personnel, and by all the skilled workers. Something had been brewing for weeks. Every engineer, white-collar specialist, Stakhanovist, every petty underling could tell this just by sniffing the air, or by adding up mentally the number purged in the last 24 hours. That Sunday, when they read the Pravda, they learned the news.
The June 26 laws had been extended to apply to them. They, too, like the ordinary workers, were henceforth to be shackled to their jobs in the enterprises and institutions which Stalin has converted into virtual penitentiaries. If the common workers were life-term prisoners, then they had become permanent supervisors, task-masters, turnkeys, guards, – trusties! – not only de facto, but de jure.
That could be perhaps endured, except by those in the provinces. But that was not all. They could no longer choose their place of employment, that would be decided for them, and was, in fact, already indicated in advance for many – the provinces, the Kuznetsk Basin, the Urals, Siberia and all points East. Still more directly involved were those who had at long last succeeded, by hook or crook, to locate themselves in Moscow, Leningrad, and other capital cities of the Soviet Union, i.e., those with cushiest jobs, in best lodgings, with best schools, best supply of food, of amusements, clubs, and all other good things in life.
The Sunday edition carried only the text of the ukase; the editorial was devoted to the marvels of Tadjik-Buryat-Mongol and other native arts. Comment was reserved for Monday. Stalin loves such week-end details.
 
Text of This Grim Ukase
Or it may be that comment was really superfluous. The ukase speaks for itself, curtly and to the point. The preamble reads:
“The task of assuring competent cadres in new factories, plants, shafts, mines, construction projects, transport, as well as in the enterprises shifting over to new forms of production [1] – demands a correct allocation of engineers, technicians, master-workmen (foremen), employees, and skilled workers among the different enterprises; and necessitates the transfer of workers from industries already disposing of competent cadres into other industries which are in need of them.”
Article 1 of the ukase lists those affected:
“Engineers, constructors, technicians, master-workers (foremen), draftsmen, bookkeepers, economists, accountants, employees in the finance and plan departments, as well as skilled workers above, and including the sixth category.” Categories above and including the sixth include the Stakhanovists. All said persons are subject to compulsory transfer “from one enterprise or institution to another independently of the territorial location of said enterprises and institutions.”
Article 5 fixes the penalty:
“All persons guilty of failing to comply with, orders ... are considered as having left their enterprise or institution arbitrarily and are remitted to the courts on the charge of violating Article 5 of the June 26 ukase of the Presidium of the Supreme Council of the USSR.”
The penalty is the GPU dungeon.
To dispel any illusions among those working on short-term contracts – which applies especially to the provinces – Article 6 abrogates “as of October 20, 1940 all short-term labor agreements” and empowers the authorities to “retain the above-specified engineers, employees and skilled workers in those enterprises and institutions in which they are now working on a contract basis.” (Pravda, October 20)
“As of October 20”! With Sunday as the deadline, even the most agile and nimble-witted could not possibly get in under the wire. The Kremlin knows its rascals.
 
Pravda Explains Why
Pravda’s belated Monday editorial clears up the little details and bears the modest, if wearisome, title: A MEASURE OF GREAT STATE IMPORTANCE.
Attempting to provide a rational explanation for this blow against its labor aristocracy, nurtured so long and so carefully, Pravda blurts out:
“In many new constructions, especially those far removed from the regional centers, a section of the specialists, employees and skilled workers enter into short-term labor agreements. An engineer or a worker arriving at a factory on a 1–2 year, contract feels not infrequently that he is only a temporary guest. In the Kuzbas mines such engineers and technicians were some time ago spoken of as people with a suitcase on their minds.’ The miners would say contemptuously: ‘This fellow is sitting on his suitcase ...’, in referring to those, who showed very little concern for the fate of the enterprise, as they bided the day of their quick departure. But the normal functioning, of a modern plant or mine requires a stable and competent cadre, and not prima donnas. It is necessary to have stable cadres who constantly perfect their knowledge, who become familiar with the enterprise in which they work.”
... Pravda thus corroborates the fact that the real brake on productivity of labor is not the inadequacy or backwardness of the mass of the Russian workers but the character of the technical-administrative staffs. Prima donnas, cheats, chiselers, and careerists bred by the fatal regime itself are to be transformed into devoted and competent cadres by the magic of shackles and the whip – if only the Ukase is “fulfilled honestly and to the letter,” promises Pravda.
 
Why Stalin Uses Compulsion
Up to new, explains the editorial, very little success has been attained in “transferring engineers, employees and skilled workers in adequate numbers from one enterprise to another. A section of the workers has shown no concern for the interests of the state and has refused to transfer. A number of employees and specialists, from among the reduced central apparatuses in Moscow, have tried to settle down in the same old place instead of leaving for the periphery where they could benefit the country greatly.” (Pravda, October 21).
The seemingly casual phrase underscored by us in the above passage discloses that the October 19 ukase is only the consummation of a whole series of steps already taken by the Kremlin in its campaign to make over and discipline the lower ranks after the dismal failure of Stakhanovism. A silent purge had taken place in the central apparatuses. But the “reduction” failed to produce the desired results, and has been supplemented by state-police action. It will fail as dismally.
Pravda cautiously computes that the concentration of “competent cadres” in the “periphery” i.e., the provinces – is about one-quarter of the concentration in Moscow, Leningrad, and other capital cities. The inference is obvious. While the apparatus swells to monstrous proportions in places where life is “easiest and merriest,” the outlying regions suffer more and more from an acute shortage of necessities and of men, for example, the vast industry of the Kuznetsk Basin. “The same situation exists in a number of other enterprises, especially in Siberia, in the East.” The stress placed by the Kremlin on the Far East is unquestionably connected with feverish war preparations.
“At the same time,” PRAVDA continues with its murderous self-indictment, “there is a surplus of engineers and technical workers in many old enterprises especially, in the industrial centers andi in the cities, above all places like Moscow and Leningrad. The transition to the 8-hour day and 7-day week has likewise freed a section of the skilled workers. The whole task is to transfer them in an ORGANIZED WAY to these enterprises which need competent cadres.” (Emphasis in the original)
 
“Enormous” Numbers Affected
While the exact number of those slated for transfer from the centers to the provinces cannot be computed, it obviously runs into hundreds of thousands. Approximately one-half of those now in the “old enterprises” must be shifted to correct the officially acknowledged disproportion.
Unable to blame the regime itself for this catastrophic condition, Pravda, nonetheless, brazenly enough, fixes the blame in part on the June 26th laws:
“Prior to the June 26 Ukase ... when there used to exist an ENORMOUS TURNOVER OF LABOR IN INDUSTRY, the new enterprises would obtain a part of their labor force spontaneously. Most often these were not stable cadres because many workers and employes moved on to other enterprises. Nonetheless a certain section of the workers did settle down. Today when a decisive struggle is being waged against labor migration, today when the self-willed departure of workers and employees from enterprises and institutions has been prohibited, it is impossible to count upon adequately filling the staff of the new enterprises on the basis of a spontaneous flow ... This means that the new enterprises and those assimilating new types of production must have an ORGANIZED flow of qualified workers.”
What a picture of chaotic conditions in industry!
The Kremlin foresees nothing, not even the consequences of its own laws. In addition, Pravda gives itself the lie direct. For weeks it has been swearing that the June laws were aimed at a very small section of the working class, not more than 3–4 per cent. Now comes an official declaration that the “decisive struggle” is being directed against an “enormous” section, skilled as unskilled, bookkeepers as well as engineers and technicians, all of whom participated in an “enormous turnover of labor in industry.” The “Stakhanovist” in the Kremlin produces decrees at such record, breaking speed that it is impossible not only to prepare for them politically, but even to reconcile today’s explanations with those of yesterday, to say nothing of tomorrow.
The bureaucratic summits are becoming more and more isolated not only from the mass of the population but from the lower ranks of the bureaucracy as well.
 
Rattle for Privileges
Within the lower ranks a muffled nationwide battle is now raging: Those in the provinces are pitted against those in the centers, engineer is pitted against engineer, Stakhanovist against Stakhanovist, one white-collar functionary against another, and so on down the bureaucratic ladder. The methods and weapons utilized in such a struggle transcend description. The arena of combat extends into the ranks of the party, for a great number of the combatants whose vital interests are affected by the ukase, are party members, together with their wives and relatives, and hold various party posts. Those able to exert special pull will remain with the fleshpots in the center. The vanquished will either go to jail, or to the Kuzbas, the Urals, Siberia, and all points East, all expenses paid.
It is too early to predict the course that the conflict between these discontented lower layers and the capricious irremovable tops will take. Sections closest to the workers may quickly feel the impulsion to draw nearer to the mass. But between the mass and the main tiers of the technical and administrational machine there still remains an enormous gulf. Nevertheless one fact is already indisputable: The interneline strife must shatter beyond repair an important section of the repressive apparatus.
 
Backed by New Frameup Trials
Within four days of the publication of the October 19 ukase, Stalin, in order to keep the conflict from reaching dangerous proportions, and to curb the discontent, has been forced to apply his sharpest methods: frame-up trials. And with them has been revived the threat of another blood-bath.
On October 24, the Soviet press began featuring day by day the trial of three defendants in the Moscow City Court. All three defendants are technicians. This establishes the audience for whose particular benefit the frame-up is staged. The GPU gets explicit orders on such items. A.D. Mityasov, the first defendant, is described as “former head of the Central Directing Bureau of ferrous metallurgy of the South and the Center”; T.P. Pervushina, a woman, is “an engineer-geologist”; and the third defendant, A.I. Karpushin – “an engineer employed by. the Leningrad Institute Mekhanobor.” All three are charged with being members of a “wrecking crew of slanderers who not only traduced honest Communists but took under their protection acknowledged enemies of the people.” All three of course confessed. (Pravda, October 24, 25, 26)
The technique of the incumbent head of the GPU, Berya, is as primitive as that of his predecessors. The fraud is self-apparent. The criminal activity of the defendants is dated back to 1935, that is, one full year prior to the staging of the Zinoviev-Kamenev Trial of August, 1936. The defendants are charged with having slandered literally hundreds in the period of 1935–40. Among their very first victims were “37 students of the Leningrad Mining Institute who were accused of Trotskyite activity.” And yet, in the same breath, we are told that: “Their reports were carefully checked and each time (in five years! – JGW) the slanderous character of these reports was revealed. And as a logical consummation of their slander activity, there they sit in the prisoner’s dock ...” (Pravda, Oct. 24) That is, the defendants “slandered” and were exposed as slanderers not only under Yagoda (who was shot) and Yezhov (who was purged), but also under Berya, but they were not brought to trial – until October 1940! Such is Pravda’s logic.
 
A New Witch-Hunt Begins
The purpose of this frame-up really lies in the “confession” of the defendants that they shielded:
“... enemies of the people ... in particular, a woman Trotskyite, D., who was exposed by the Leningrad, party organization.
“‘How are we to explain the fact that you took upon yourself the defense of D.?’ the defendant is asked by Prosecutor Khabarov.
“‘It was my mistake’, softly answered Pervushna.” (Pravda, October 26, our emphasis)
The hunt is on again for the “enemies of the people.” In the Leningrad organization of the party, the GPU uncovers a “woman Trotskyite, D”. The Prosecutor dares not mention her full name. More significant is the fact that the term “Trotskyite” has reappeared in the columns of Stalin’s press two months after he had Trotsky murdered.
* * *
Footnote
1. This guarded formula refers to the conversion of many plants into armament and munitions factories, not foreseen by the Third Five Year Plan but made necessary by the Finnish experience and the growing war danger.
 



The new, silent purge is pruning the ranks of the Kremlin’s most pampered and fabulously-paid servants – “the creative artists.” Dramatists and scenario writers have suffered the heaviest casualties.
Apparently the formulas for the 1940 edition of the purge vary depending upon the individuals and circumstances involved. Thus the Komsomol and Trade Union bureaucracies were decimated under the formula of bezdelniki and darmoyedniki (loafers, scoundrels who eat the bread they haven’t earned). But the formula for the intellectuals is: klevetniki (slanderers). Trotsky suggested that the epoch of Soviet Thermidor will go into history of artistic creation pre-eminently as an epoch of mediocrities, laureates and toadies. According to Stalin, the designation should be corrected to read – slanderers.
The slanderer of the month (October) is one S. Kolkov, author of a play entitled, The Kovrov Family. This play was staged by the Gorki State Theatre, the initial performances were greeted with ecstatic, if stereotyped, reviews, scores of other theatres rushed production plans – when suddenly Kolkov’s masterpiece was deflated. On October 13 Pravda indicted his play as Slander Against the Soviet Family, damned the Gorki Theatre for befouling its stage with it, and generally berated all the “responsible” people for approving its production. Not one among them, lamented Pravda, showed “the least sign of political perspicacity, not one saw in this play falsehood and distortion of Soviet reality.”
Pravda dwells in detail on Kolkov’s opus. The main characters in the play are Kovrov, engineer and party member; his wife, Olga Alexandrovna, a party member; their ten year old son, Mitya, whom they both love passionately. The parents squabble all the time, especially over the upbringing of their boy. Mitya, spoiled by his mother, neglects his studies, but father always get glowing reports about his son’s progress in school. A crisis ensues when Kolkov learns on returning from a prolonged stay in the provinces that Mitya has been kept back another year in the same grade. His wife utilizes the opportunity for carrying out a long contemplated plan. Gathering her possessions and Mitya she leaves Kovrov in favor of a mutual friend, the jurist Borovsky, another party member, and this newly constituted family immediately “departs to a summer resort.” Kolkov falls ill from worry about the education of his son. End of Act One.
The next scene takes place in a courtroom. In it Kovrov delivers a very long speech which obviously exasperated Pravda. He “lashes as un-Soviet the educational methods of child raising followed by Olga Alexandrovna, he talks at length about Communist views on the family ... in short, proves his rights to the child.” “Kovrov’s ‘eloquence’,” continues Pravda sarcastically, “fails to sway the court.” The judge interrogates the child. Mitya, it appears, would prefer to live with both his father and mother. Whereupon the court dismisses Kovrov’s plea and rules that the boy must remain with his mother.
In the third act Mitya degenerates completely. He longs for his father, associates with street children, and stops attending school altogether. He becomes ruder and ruder to grownups, acts like a hooligan on the street, and learns to steal. Even his mother begins to worry.
Meanwhile her lover Borovsky gets bored with her worries, and still more with her personally. “It seemed to me,” sums up the jurist, Borovsky, “that I loved her a lot. But once we started living together I suddenly sensed that it wasn’t so. I don’t love her at all.” Mitya decides to run away with a homeless waif who has become his pal and preceptor; but in trying to board a train, he slips, falls under the wheels, and is killed. The lone witness of Mitya’s tragic end is his faithful nurse, who runs after him, calls out to him, but cannot catch him. Curtain.
In writing this problem-play, Kolkov, the author, obviously felt himself a champion of the “Soviet Family,” and must have made sure of adhering rigidly to the line of “Bolshevik self-critiicism” as laid down by Pravda. It is equally unquestionable that the innumerable right-thinking and “responsible” people who passed the script viewed it in. the same highly moral light. Pravda itself not so very long ago featured much more embarrassing family complications and used to write editorials on education from which Kolkov’s hero undoubtedly quoted wholesale. In vain! By the time Kolkov had finished his play, antechambered all the people who mattered, obtained all the indispensable approvals, in short by the time his play reached the stage, life and its problems had altered beyond recognition, at least in Pravda’s eyes.
New policies demand new plays. Small wonder, that Kolkov’s play is, as the French say mildly, mal à propos (evil to the purpose.) For instance, the prominent characters are mostly married party members, and at the same time all the families in the play without exception break up. Even Gavrik, the homeless waif, is a by-product of a broken home. His father committed suicide out of “sexual jealousy.” Kolkov surpassed himself in inventing so plausible and yet so original, almost poetic, an explanation for the presence of a homeless waif on a Soviet stage, but even this superb stroke only aided in his downfall. “Let us grant,” Pravda comments cautiously, “that there is such a family, maybe more than one. But when a family of this sort is taken apart from, the entire surrounding reality one obtains a – false – nay, worse than that! – a vicious generalization, a slander against the Soviet family.”
Kolkov’s real sin, however, is not in failing to counterbalance an aborted family with an idyllic couple and a budding Stalin. He made his mistake in centering his play on the educational problem, which Pravda belligerently points out is a “problem of greatest state importance.”
Sons and daughters of workers and peasants had just been driven from the Soviet schools to form an industrial labor reserve. Only the Mityas, i.e., the children of the privileged, can now attend school, because their parents alone can pay the tuition. All the state resources were being mobilized in October to educate the populace to understand the historical significance of this latest victory. The Presidium of the C.C.T.U. convened in solemn session and resolved:
“The trade union organizations must explain to the workers, the state employees, and members of their families the significance of an organized preparation of cadres of new workers from among the urban and kolkhoz youth, and the creation of indispensable labor reserves for industry. In doing this they must pay special attention to carry on the work of explanation among ... the intermediate secondary schools, in the secondary schools, in children’s rooms, and school rooms, at clubs and places of culture.” (Pravda, October 13)
The All-Union Committee in Charge of Highest Education lost no time in issuing instructions to university directors, proposing that “they establish rigid control of tuition payments, and drop from the rolls all students not paid in by the date designated.” (idem) Everybody is busy.
And in the midst of this activity a tired bureaucrat in search of relaxation walks into the Gorki State Theatre and there staring him in the face struts a spoiled and horrid brat, a blurred image of his pet at home, “attended by his nurse, cranky and capricious, issuing insolent orders, yelling (just like papa): ‘Take off my shoes! ... Give me a clean shirt!’ Always referring to his mother. ‘Mama ordered you to keep me in cleanliness ... Mama said you must feed me well.’” Slaps his nurse’s face, and justifies himself, “Mama told you I’m a nervous child and mustn’t be upset.” (Pravda, October 13). The nurse breaks into tears, and Pravda breaks into cold sweat and shrieks in the ears of all “responsible people”: “Art has the capacity of generalizing things!” How true.
Besides, a worker may wander into the theatre. Or maybe a student just dropped from the rolls. Why, anyone in the audience is apt, especially under the impact of art, to start generalizing a few stray ideas.
To crown it all, Kolkov meddles with another issue: hooliganism. Pravda passes it by without comment. But hooliganism has also become a “problem of greatest state importance.” It has penetrated so deeply into Soviet industry and institutions that the authorities are finding it very difficult to differentiate between a hooligan and a worker, i.e., between deliberate resistance to the June laws and an innocent accident.
But from Kolkov’s play one could readily conclude that the families of party members, engineers, jurists and other “responsible people” are the breeding places of – hooliganism!
“Who needs this?” wails Pravda.
In a concentration camp Kolkov may have an opportunity to compare notes with another inadvertent “slanderer,” one Avdeyenko, author of the novel I Love. but really celebrated for breaking all records several years ago in “loving” Stalin. Avdeyenko slapped together in an absent-minded moment a scenario dealing with high-life among the Komsomol bureaucrats. Playwriting, it turns out, is a hazardous occupation “under socialism.”
 



Stalin has summoned a Party Conference to convene on February 15, 1941 according to an Associated Press dispatch dated Moscow, December 20. The curtly worded dispatch states that the agenda of this, the Eighteenth Party Conference, will be limited to two points:

Discussion of the Party’s “work in transport and industry”;
 
“Organizational questions.”

The mere calling of a Party Conference would in and of itself constitute news of primary importance, and denote a major move on Stalin’s part. It is the first Party Conference called in nine years. The preceding Conference – the Seventeenth – took place in January 1932. Coming as it does on the heels of recent Soviet developments, the significance of this call cannot be exaggerated.
If under Lenin the Party Conferences were milestones in the revolutionary history of the Bolshevik movement, then under Stalin every single one of the five Conferences already held was filled with a counter-revolutionary content.
In Lenin’s lifetime twelve Party Conferences were convened – the Twelfth and last in August, 1922 when he was gravely ill. The most famous of them is the April Conference at which Lenin presented his April Theses. Since Lenin died, five Conferences were called and held prior to the one scheduled for February 1941. Each of them marked a new stage in the degeneration of the Russian Communist Party; each one of them served Stalin to consolidate power more and more firmly in his hands.
In the first four years after Lenin’s death – 1924–1927 – three Party Conferences took place – the Thirteenth, Fourteenth, and Fifteenth, all three under the banner of the struggle against Trotskyism. The fifteenth Party Conference directly paved the way for the expulsion of the Left Opposition (Trotskyists) in 1927, and the exile of Trotsky to Alma-Ata. Two years elapsed before the Sixteenth Party Conference was staged – this time to organize the crushing of the right wing led by Bukharin and Rykov (with whom Stalin had been allied); and also to prepare for a shift in Soviet economic policy. The Sixteenth Conference convened in April 1929, the year which really marks the inception of the First Five Year Plan.
There was a three year interval before the Seventeenth Party Conference convened in January 1932, in the very midst of a grave economic crisis in the country, and an equally grave international situation – it was the critical year of Hitler’s rise to power. The task of this Conference was to organize the crushing of opposition at home, and launch a drive against Trotskyism on an international scale. In February of the same year. Trotsky was officially deprived of Soviet citizenship. “A logical consummation of the Seventeenth Party Conference” (Trotsky).
Although in the interim two party Congresses have been held, Stalin has refrained from using the edged weapon of “Conferences.” That he has exhumed it from his arsenal, coupled with the content of the agenda for the coming Conference, is ominously tell-tale.
Since the passage of the June 26 laws lengthening the work week and prohibiting the workers from leaving their places of employment. the party organizations have been under constant fire for their failure to enforce this or that ukase in the interminable series of ukases issued by the Kremlin in the last seven months. A silent purge of the party ranks has been going on for some time now, but has obviously proved inadequate. Hence a “discussion” is on the agenda of the Conference on the question of the party’s role in the economic life of the country. The second point on the agenda, The Organization Question, implies that there are shortcomings in the existing organizational set-up which obstruct the party’s “work in transport and industry” – and therefore the party must be most certainly “renovated’’ organizationally.
Never has a Conference been held under Stalin not preceded by savage repressions and a large-scale purge. Stalin will not break this precedent in the eight weeks assigned for the “preparation” of the 1941 Conference. A major surgical operation is now in progress.
 
Vital Section of Industry Militarized
The Conference call was issued on the same day that Marshall Timoshenko, head of the Red Army and Voroshilov’s successor, promulgated a sensational decree: The Red Army itself will run factories “which will produce articles needed by the soldiers and in this way ease the burden on industry as a whole. The soldiers themselves will manufacture the articles:” (Jewish Day, December 20, 1940)
If this report is true – and there is no ground for impugning its veracity, although the news was apparently ignored by the big metropolitan dailies – it implies far more than an extension of the compulsory labor legislation to the soldiers in the Red Army.
Timoshenko’s decree – by order of the Kremlin – militarises a vital section of Soviet industry – the defense industry which has operated for years under a special Commissariat, and which produces all the “articles needed by soldiers” from boots to bombers. Whatever factories are taken over by the Army, these will then operate under military discipline, which in its turn has been recast under Timoshenko to conform with the discipline in bourgeois armies, Fascist or “democratic.”
There are millions of skilled and unskilled workers in the Army or in the reserve. In fact, practically every adult and able-bodied man in the Soviet Union is subject to military conscription. Furthermore, youngsters of 17 and even 16 are likewise liable to draft. In general, “running factories with soldiers” presents on paper no great difficulties. Millions can be conscripted on short order, subjected to a short but intensive acquaintance with the “new” army discipline, and then assigned to factories to produce “articles needed by soldiers” under military rules and regulations.
Even if the Army does, not immediately take over so much as a single factory, even one that is being constructed, the decree would still mean that Stalin has taken the first and all-important step toward militarizing Soviet industry. The decisive point is that a juridical basis for such militarization has already been established: There is no line of demarcation between the war industries and “peace” industries, especially in the event of hostilities. Whether Stalin will succeed or not – that is another question.
The Conference call, plus the Timoshenko – December decree, plus all of the preceding ukases point incontrovertibly in one direction: The economic crisis in the Soviet Union instead of being mitigated has on the contrary been aggravated – and carries with it a direct threat of passing into a social and political crisis of Stalin’s regime, and of the Soviet Union.
December 20, 1940
 



What is going on in the Soviet Union? Accurate information is now practically confined to decrees which emanate from the Kremlin. And even this news arrives in garbled form after weeks and months of delay. The volume of new legislation has assumed proportions almost as monstrous as the content of the laws themselves. Each new decree surpasses the previous one in ferocity, and at the same time reveals the blind-alley in which Stalin’s regime has arrived.
The 1940 legislation may be roughly divided into two complementary categories. On the one hand are measures, in essence political, designed to consolidate the ranks of the bureaucracy by granting new immunities and privileges, new ranks and prerogatives: For example, the new income tax legislation, exempting the possessors of medals, orders and decorations, “Heroes of the Soviet Union,” “Heroes of Labor” (Stakhanovists), while taxing all wages and salaries of 150 roubles a month and making these taxes deductible at the source; the investment of directors with “sole and indivisible authority” in the enterprises; the further aggrandisement of the officers’ corps by restoring the titles of General, Admiral, etc. and reintroducing non-commissioned ranks from corporal to top-sergeant.
On the other hand there are savage totalitarian reprisals against the workers, the peasants and the youth. Chief among these are: The April laws against the peasantry which restore in practice forced collections of foodstuffs and raw materials; the June laws against labor, abolishing the 7-hour day 5-day week, legalizing the 8-hour day, 6-day week, and in reality even longer hours, without any increase in wages, making it a criminal offense to quit one’s job, or even come late to work – in short, converting the workers into industrial serfs bound to the factory; the October laws against the youth, driving the children of workers and peasants from schools and universities by instituting tuitions, and making children 14 years of age and over liable to draft in the “labor reserve,” i.e., restoring child labor.
It is one thing to pass laws. To enforce them is another.
A series of articles dealing with these laws and their significance, and the mass resistance which they are engendering has already appeared in the Socialist Appeal for October and November. In this article I propose to deal primarily with two “minor” decrees which serve to throw a glaring light on conditions existing in the Soviet Union.
On August 17 Soviet legislation against theft, already the harshest in modern times, was amended as follows:
“Petty theft, regardless of the amount, committed in institutions and enterprises, is punishable by a term of 1 year in jail, unless a severer penalty is attached to the crime.” (Pravda August 18. My emphasis.)
Anyone caught with so much as a nail in his or her possession faces jail for one year. Unbelievable? In the columns of Izvestya and Pravda are reported sentences of one year’s imprisonment in the following cases:

A worker caught with a lump of bronze
A driver with a few pounds of candy.
A woman-worker with “13 meters of burlap.”
Another with cookies and sugar.
A worker with “two English locks.”

Downright theft assumes such a mass character only when there is a famine in objects of consumption, and when the cost of necessities rises. The Kremlin’s censor may clamp tight the lid on the actual data relating to the worsening conditions of the masses; the truth seeps through in a Kremlin ukase. Speculation, which springs from the same source, likewise reaches new heights. During the purge of the Trade Union apparatus in August, one of the bureaucrats blurted out:
“An investigation conducted by the District Committee has revealed that in the city of Kostroma there is a solid bloc of 1,000 families not one of whom had a job either in a State enterprise or institution; in Yaroslavl, there are 114 families at the textile combine Krasny Perekop who inhabit factory homes, who are the first ones to come into possession of scarce articles and commodities, and who engage in trading, and lead a parasitic holiday life.”
From time to time, a few speculators are arrested, some are shot, and the press features the news. Meanwhile, speculation increases. Even the bureaucrats who as a rule occupy “factory homes” find themselves elbowed out by the illicit traders.
The second decree issued on August 17 amends the criminal code on hooliganism as follows:
“Hooligan actions in enterprises, Institutions, and public places are punishable by a term of one year in jail, unless there is a severer penalty attached to the crime.”
In addition to this emergency amendment, special courts were set up to hear cases of hooliganism, preferably on the same day the arrests are made. No red tape.
The efficiency in applying this law has been little short of breath-taking. A single issue of Izvestia for August 27 lists eleven trials of hooligans:
CASE A: Defendant 26 years old, charged with “creating a scandal in a house.” Sentence: one year in jail, three years exile.
CASE B: Defendant 19 years of age, used “unprintable language in a trolley car” – one year in jail.
CASE C: Defendant 38 years old, caused a “scandal in an Emergency Ambulance” – one year in jail.
CASE D: Defendant 28 years of age, “drunk in a trolley car” – one year in jail.
CASE E: Defendant 19 years old, caused a disturbance, “engaged in a brawl” – one year in jail, three years exile.
CASE F: Defendant 26 years old, “used profanity on a public thoroughfare” – one year in jail.
CASE G: Defendant 20 years old, (brandished a “safety razor blade,” “threatened to slash a citizen” – three years jail, four years exile.
CASE H: Defendant 31 years old, bashed “another citizen in the face with a suitcase” – three years jail, four years exile.
CASE I: Defendant 45 years old, charged with “hooliganism on the street” – four years in jail, deprived of civil rights for three years, not permitted to live in eight specified cities for a period of five years.
CASE J: Defendant 22 years old, charged with slugging a citizen and “resisting arrest” – three years jail, deprived of civil rights for three years.
CASE K: Defendant 41 years old, “profanity on a public highway,” “resisted arrest” – 3 years in jail.
I have a confession to make: I did not see through the intense campaign in the press in preparation for this decree. On July 31, for instance, Izvestia declared that hooliganism was increasing; that the authorities were “not coping with the situation”; that four People’s Judges and three city magistrates had to be removed from their posts because of leniency toward hooligans; and that this “condition was true not only of Moscow but other cities.” I assumed that hooliganism of the ordinary garden variety was involved, and that it was increasing as is undoubtedly the case. My suspicions that something more was involved were aroused first by the text of the ukase which announced in so many words that the arena of hooliganism had extended beyond the public places into the very heart of Soviet industry and trade, the “enterprises and institutions.”
But it took the case of a 25 year old worker – Case L in Izvestia’s list – to open my eyes concerning the true identity of the most dangerous “hooligans.” The case follows verbatim:
“The case of I.V. Timonin, born in 1915. On August 23 (the defendant) appeared at a clinic where he demanded that he be issued a doctor’s certificate excusing him from work; becoming chagrined because the thermometer indicated only normal temperature he indulged in debauchery (!), and used unprintable language. Sentenced on August 23 to three years in jail, not permitted to live in nine specified cities of the Soviet Union after the completion of the sentence.” (Izvestia, August 27.)
 
Easy on the Bureaucrats
Any factory or office worker who dares in any way to resist, as much as grumble, or engage in any other “debauchery” against the smooth application of the June 26 ukase is immediately guilty as charged: a “hooligan”! One can now fully appreciate the humor of the cartoons and skits against “hooliganism” featured in Stalin’s humorous periodical, so aptly named Krokodil (crocodile). The intensity of repressions reflects the force of resistance. Despite all the Kremlin censors we learn that the resistance of the Soviet workers is growing!
To round out the picture it is necessary to cite still another trial. This time, the defendants are M.S. Vorobiev, head of the Political Department of the Gorky Railroad and G.I. Romanov, head of passenger traffic of the same railroad. The defendants, we learn immediately, were expelled from the party and “handed over to the courts.” The report of the court-proceedings follows:
“In the Gorky railroad loafers and disrupters felt themselves quite privileged. In July and August, 1572 cases of violations (of labor discipline) and 145 cases of self-willed departures were recorded ... M.S. Vorobiev did not struggle against the violators of labor discipline, he was too busy arranging for his own personal, family comfort. D. Pavlova, a woman conductor, served as his cook, and he made a valet de chambre out of the secretary of the Political Department. They worked for Vorobiev and continued to draw their pay from the state payroll. The head of the Political Department was imitated by the commanders below him ...”
It is not clear just what the charges against Vorobiev are: collusion with the violators of the June 26 ukase, turning his subordinate not only formally but actually into a flunkey, or cheating the state of his servants’ wages. The report tries to clarify the issue:
“‘How dared you, a political leader, to violate the Soviet law so crudely, and set so bad an example to your subordinates?’ asks the prosecutor.
“‘I did not sufficiently grasp the importance of the June 26 ukase of the Praesidium of the Supreme Council,’ replies the defendant with assumed innocence.
“At the trial,” continues Pravda, “it was disclosed that Vorobiev’s crimes were known to the prosecuting attorney of the Railway, the editor of the Railway newspaper, the head of the Railway, and other people in the service ... In court, the defendant G.I. Romanov confessed: ‘I behaved like a coward before Vorobiev. I did not want complications. In this lies my mistake.’ ‘I did not want complications.’”
This is more than a confession. It is a self-portrait of the bureaucracy.
The court sentenced Vorobiev to – “two years in jail.” After all, he was not a “hooligan.” His accomplice, G.I. Romanov, was not jailed. He was not even removed from his post but received a sentence of “one year penal labor at place of employment” – as head of the railway! – and “fined 20% of his wages.” (Pravda September, 24.) The prosecuting attorney and the editor of the Railway, not to mention Vorobiev’s subordinates who “imitated his example,” were apparently not even arrested.
Pravda need have no fears in publishing this. No Soviet citizen would so much as dare curse under his breath on penalty of going to jail for one year, and maybe for life!



By ukase of October 2, Soviet children 14 years of age and over are immediately subject to draft into a conscript labor force; the right to education so solemnly “guaranteed” by the Stalin Constitution, has been abolished, without a formal constitutional amendment, or consultation of the Supreme Council of the USSR. The doors of secondary schools and universities have been slammed shut in the faces of the Soviet youth.
 
Retroactive Law
The retroactive law passed by People’s Commissars introduces “payment for instruction, from September 1, in the eighth, ninth and tenth grades of secondary schools, and in universities.” (Pravda, October 3, 1940. Our emphasis)
In Moscow, Leningrad and capital cities of the Soviet Republics, the tuition in secondary schools is set at 200 roubles a year; “In all other cities and villages – 150 roubles a year.” Tuition in universities is 400 roubles a year in Moscow, Leningrad and capital cities of the Soviet Federation; 300 roubles in other cities (where universities are few and far between). Art schools – fine arts, drama, music and other highest paid professions – 500 roubles. State subsidies to university students have been withdrawn, except for the “best students.” The rest, and this means approximately 98 per cent, will have to support themselves. The supply of Soviet scientists, engineers, technicians, already meager, is thus further reduced at the very source. Even in secondary schools education is no longer free.
 
School Inaccessible to Poor
The average wage of a Soviet worker is below 200 roubles a month; the mass of the peasantry earns far less. Secondary schooling is therefore inaccessible to the sons and daughters of workers and peasants, and within reach only of the privileged progeny of governmental, party and trade union bureaucrats, functionaries of the GPU, labor aristocracy (Stakhanovists), factory directors and administrators, engineers, doctors, and so on. Thousands of children who had already started the current school year must now leave the, secondary schools, not to mention those poor students still able to penetrate into the universities and technological institutes.
 
American Press Silent
Not a word of this has been allowed to leak out in the American press. In the last of a series of articles purportedly devoted to the “cultural and economical well-being of the people of the USSR,” featured by the Daily Worker, one G. Stanley writes. “After the Revolution the doors of universities were thrown wide open to all the working people.” (Daily Worker, November 16)
He forgets to mention a trifle newly added by Stalin: tuitions. This article is dated, Moscow, November 15, six weeks after the publication of the. above decrees, six weeks after “all the working people” were kicked out through the wide open doors. Mr. Stanley is under orders to suppress the fate of one of the remaining conquests of the October revolution. As for the capitalist press, the editors are well informed but keep silent lest the diplomatic negotiations between Washington and Moscow be hindered unnecessarily.
 
Stalinist Boast
What about other educational facilities so precious to all the “Friends of the Soviet Union?” The same Stanley in the same article still boasts brazenly: “But the network of educational institutions is not limited to ordinary schools. There is also a wide network of correspondence courses available to all Soviet citizens. Thus, while continuing to work in the factory, office or on the collective farm, one may qualify tor the degree of engineer, teacher, agronomist etc.”
Stalin’s pen-prostitute again obeys orders. The readers of the Daily Worker must not learn that correspondence courses are henceforth restricted likewise to those who have the cash in their pockets to pay – one-half of the respective school and university fees. The Soviet press is even conducting a campaign to place lectures at clubs, enterprises, collective farms on a paid admission basis. People, it appears, don’t like free lectures.
The official motivation of the cultural expropriation of the Soviet youth follows:
“After duly considering the higher level of material welfare of the toilers and the considerable sums expended by the Soviet government on constructing, equipping and maintaining the incessantly expanding network of secondary and highest educational institutions, the Council of People’s Commissars of the USSR finds it necessary to place a share of the educational expenditures in secondary schools and universities in the USSR upon the toilers themselves, and has in this connection decided ... to introduce the above-listed tuitions.” (Pravda, October 3)
To believe the Kremlin, the toilers are now so well off that their children need no longer go to school.
 
Real Motive
The real motive for the cultural expropriation of the youth lies in the child-labor decrees promulgated on the same day. The Pravda, in an editorial hailing these “historic decrees of October 2” – incidentally, no comment has yet appeared in any Soviet paper on the equally “historic” abrogation of free education – declares openly that child labor was made necessary by the scarcity of labor which, In turn, was primarily due to the refusal of peasants to leave the land.
“In pre-revolutionary Russian villages ... millions of poor peasants would leave each year to hire themselves out in cities ... In the USSR... the collective farmers lead a secure life. But for this very reason the old sources which assured a spontaneous influx of labor forces into industry have been shut off, have disappeared.” (Pravda, October 3)
 
Preferred the Land
During the first two Five Year Plans more than 15-million peasants swarmed into the cities, where conditions were better than in the country. As the housing, living and working conditions grew more and more intolerable, the peasants preferred to remain on the land. With the inception of the Third Five Year Plan (1938), the flow of peasants was reduced to a trickle. The passage of the June laws has evidently shut off even this trickle. The acute shortage of labor was further aggravated by the mobilization of vast armies.
The text of the ukase restoring child-labor reads:
“In our country unemployment has been destroyed, poverty and pauperization in city and country forever abolished, and in view of all this we haven’t got people who would be compelled to knock at factory gates and beg admission into the factories, thus spontaneously forming a constant reserve of labor power for industry.”
All “spontaneous” sources of adult labor supply have been “shut off” by the fatal regime of the bureaucracy. But if adults cannot be compelled “to knock at. factory gates and beg admission,” there still remains the youth. Unable to get adult workers, the Kremlin proposes to tap the reservoir of child labor, to create by ukase hereditary industrial serfs.
 
Driven Out of Schools
The chairmen of collective farms are instructed by law to “designate two (children) for every 100 members of the collective farm.” Smaller collectives, at least one. In the urban centers, the city soviets will do the “designating” with this difference, that city quotas are not fixed in advance. In other words, the urban youth will be driven into industry at a speed depending upon the circumstances. But this child labor itself must have a “reserve.” In order to create such a “spontaneous” reserve it was indispensable to drive the children of workers and peasants, the overwhelming majority of’ the Soviet children, out of schools. And so they were driven.
Child labor cannot operate modern industry. This, by the way, was one of the reasons the bourgeoisie was amenable, under working class pressure in advanced countries, to legislating child labor out of the basic industry. One is almost embarrassed to repeat this elementary fact. Yet Stalin not only reintroduces – on the very eve of the Twenty-third Anniversary of October – this bestial relic of barbarism but envisages it as the only available reservoir of labor power for Soviet industry. The irreconcilable conflict between the further rule of the bureaucracy and the further economic, cultural and social advancement of the Soviet masses dictates the logic of Moloch-Stalin’s decrees.
 
Window Dressing
But will not the children first go to “trade schools”? Doesn’t the law provide for 1–2 years’ training at “government expense”? Won’t they serve only as apprentices?
All this is window-dressing, for the consumption of the gullible faithful abroad, and the venal apologists of the G.P.U. The decrees provide that the Council of People’s Commissars, through a specially appointed board, has sole and complete jurisdiction over the “disposal of the labor reserve.” This ominous clause invalidates in and of itself any and all other provisions, assuming of course that the gang in the Kremlin feels itself in any way bound by the scraps of paper it labels “laws.” There are no facilities for housing let alone training. If any further verification of the real aims of these decrees is required, we cite the date set for the induction of child labor into basic industries – coal mines, ferrous and non-ferrous mines, iron and steel, non-ferrous metallurgy, oil industry, building trades: It is six months. That is, approximately the time it will actually take to fully organize the draft.
 
Enslaving Youth
The bureaucracy avows, in so many words, that it cannot operate Soviet industry today and has no prospect of operating Soviet industry in the future except by enslaving the youth of the country, by chaining them to industry just as it has sought to chain the adult workers. That is its program “on the threshold of Communism.”
It may be argued that by employing child labor the bureaucracy will be able to alleviate at least partially the crisis now convulsing Soviet industry. In any case, succeed in smashing the resistance of the workers to the June laws. Moscow fervently hopes so. But other and much more immediate consequences must flow from this ruthless attempt to enslave the youth. It is as if Stalin was deliberately bent on convincing every child in the Soviet Union that his regime is the mortal enemy of the youth whom he has now expropriated not only politically, but culturally and socially.
 
Driven into Blind Alley
Except for a thin layer of privileged and exempt children, the mass of the Soviet youth can no longer cherish any illusions about their future. In the period of the first two Five Year Plans, these illusions – “Wait till we finish the Second Five Year Plan and enter Communism!” – played an enormous role in stabilizing the regime. Driven into a blind alley the youth has no perspective, no alternative other than to engage in an open struggle for self- preservation. Stalin has lit the fuse to a charge with the greatest explosive power.
The first steps in this struggle have already been taken by the younger workers in their resistance to the June 26 laws. The October 2 legislation will not reduce but intensify tenfold this resistance. They have acquired a powerful ally in the youth of the land, especially the sons and daughter of the millions recently incorporated into the Soviet Federation.
 
Bureaucracy Sees Danger
Nor is the bureaucracy blind to the danger. But it deludes itself with the assurance that the totalitarian machine of repressions will again see it through. All the gears of the apparatus are grinding overtime. The party and the Komsomol (Russia YCL) have orders to “engage in vast politicalmass activities which will insure the fulfillment of the ukase, and in particular obtain a considerable flood of voluntary declarations of enrollment in the schools” (read: child labor army). All campaigns in the press have been sidetracked in favor of this latest one. Newspapers shriek hysterically about the “unanimous approbation of these great historic decrees;” rave about the great uplift of alleged factory mass meetings all equally unanimous; and, above all, greet/ecstatically the least rumor of “voluntary enrollments.” It is as if Stalin intended to leave nothing undone in exposing to every child in the Soviet Union the methods and inner-mechanics of his rule.
 



The “Foreign Delegation” of the Russian Mensheviks, that is, their leading center, has split on the question of the attitude toward Stalin’s regime. Theodore Dan has resigned as chairman and left his post as one of the two editors of Sotsialisticheski Vestnik (Socialist Courier), the Menshevik organ published in Paris. Yugov has resigned as secretary. Abramovich is now provisional chairman and sole editor, B. Dvinov the new secretary.
Abramovich and his friends are “principled defeatists” in relation to Stalin and the Soviet Union. They refuse to draw any distinction whatever between their “defeatist” policy toward Hitler and their policy toward Stalin. Dan, on the other hand, seeks to establish “subtle” distinctions between his attitude toward Hitler as “against Stalin and the Soviet Union.”
Dan and Abramovich, who remained defensists under the Czar and under Kerensky, have finally become “defeatists.” Abramovich wants to go the whole hog. Dan apparently has reservations. As we shall presently see, Dan’s reservations do not at all flow from any deep desire on his part to defend the remaining conquests of the October revolution, but rather from his hopes that a possibility still remains of bringing the Soviet Union back into the orbit of the democratic imperialists. Abramovich thinks the only way to attain this is by “unconditional defeatism.” Dan believes the more realistic policy to be that of “conditional defeatism.”
Formally speaking, in recent years, the Mensheviks have recognized in Russia “elements of socialism.” Insofar as Stalin marched shoulder to shoulder with “democracy,” they were “defensists.” In other words, they were“defensists” yesterday for the self-same reason that they are “defeatists” today.
 
They Changed Their Stand After Hitler-Stalin Pact
When Stalin signed his pact with Hitler on August 30, 1939, Dan and Abramovich concluded it was necessary to re-evaluate their attitude toward Stalin whom they have always identified with the Soviet Union. There were no disputes among them as to what was involved in this re-evaluation.
As Abramovich writes: There was complete harmony in appraising Stalin’s rule as the “rule of a nationalist-imperialist clique, which has completely broken with the proletariat and with socialism and has degraded itself to the level of Hitlerite Nazism.”
“All of us,” complains Abramovich, “have unanimously recognized that his (Stalin’s) regime has completely broken with revolution and socialism; that his regime is the greatest enemy of the working class and has become transformed into the rule of a national-imperialist Bonapartist clique, on the same plane as Hitlerism, with its fate tied irrevocably to Hitlerism.” (Sots. Vestnik, March 5.)
Unanimity was preserved when the second world war actually broke out. Dan and Abramovich lined up solidly on the side of the “democracies,” where they still remain despite their differences. And the invasion of Finland found both of them unconditional supporters of Mannerheim’s “democracy” and “independence.” Abramovich reminds Dan that Dan himself “wants with all his heart a debacle and a defeat for Stalin in his brutal assault on Finland.”
 
Differ on Formula for Defeatism
Why, then, have these good friends split? And after all these years! They have a principled difference. At least Dan claims it is. Abramovich, on the contrary, brands as artificial Dan’s “attempt to construct some sort of difference between ‘principled defeatism’ which he (Dan) advocates towards Hitler, and some other kind of defeatism, apparently ‘tactical’ defeatism ... in relation not only to the Soviet Union as a country but even towards the Stalinist regime (!) which oppresses the country.” (The ironic exclamation is Abramovich’s.) Abramovich, it appears, holds that there is only one kind of defeatism. Dan argues there are various kinds. Abramovich is ready to concede to Dan that there is a “difference” between Germany and the Soviet Union as such, i.e., as countries, but that this difference has no bearing on the question of defeatism.
Abramovich’s argument in summary form is as follows:

If war is the continuation of politics by other means, then “totalitarian war is the continuation of totalitarian politics”;
 
A preliminary condition for the violent overthrow of a totalitarian regime is military defeat; therefore,
 
“We must strive for the most complete and ruthless military defeat of the Stalinist regime.”

“From this it does not, of course, follow at all,” continues Abramovich, “that we want the atomization, dismemberment, bankruptcy or enslavement of our country or any of its various sections. On the contrary, we will fight might and main against this.”
Lest some innocent reader faint with surprise at Abramovich’s conversion to violence and lest he conclude that therein lies the crux of the differences between Abramovich and Dan, we hasten to add that Dan, too, supports the thesis of “violent overthrow” (totalitarian regimes cannot be overthrown in peace-time or peacefully, they both agree).
 
They Both Want a “Palace Revolution”
Furthermore, this “revolution” so ardently supported now by Mensheviks is a “palace revolution.” Or, as Abramovich so aptly puts it: “... Of all the forms of violent overthrow of totalitarian dictatorship the most probable appears to be that which bears in our literature the highly-qualified label of ‘palace revolution’.”
And Abramovich swears that Dan himself acknowledges that “history, sad to say, has apparently left no other way out save for a palace revolution.” A Menshevik sheds tears even when confronted by “history” with such a revolution!
Dan, however, is a pessimist. He warns against any illusions. It would only mean that “another Bolshevik clique will come to power.” That is why a different “defeatist” approach is necessary. He does not want to wait for a military defeat but seeks rather to liquidate Stalin’s regime “by means of inner forces” and make the “revolution” a lever for the defeat of Stalin’s “criminal war policies.”
Despite his tears, Abramovich is very optimistic. He lists various “palace candidates” to replace Stalin, and concludes that all of them (including Voroshilov) would be compelled to be very, very progressive. Why? Because a palace revolution, even with Voroshilov at the head, he argues, must unavoidably catapult Russia from the present coalition with Hitler into an alliance with the Allies. And what could be more “progressive” than this to a Menshevik?
Dan does not contest the “progressive” character of such a change. He simply refuses to cherish any illusions that a Voroshilov will behave better than a Stalin. After all, they are both “Bolsheviks” – in Dan’s eyes.
 
A Sample of Their Polemic
P. Garvey, a “principled defeatist” argues as follows against Dan’s position:
“What we need is clarity! The instrument of the Marxist method must serve us but so as not vainly to obscure controversial issues; so as not to cover up semi-assertions, immediately accompanied by qualifications; so as not to linger and temporize, which only paralyzes action ... Our times demand forthright answers to the accursed questions. It is impermissible under the cloak of ‘dialectics’ to cover up lapses and irreconcilable contradictions in one’s own position ... It is impermissible to see in Soviet Russia a totalitarian state ... and at the same time to seek in this social order of state slavery ‘elements of Socialism’ which must be ‘sustained’ until the world social revolution. It is impermissible to want the defeat of the Soviet Union in the war against Finland – and at the same time, with glaring inconsistency, to insist on a subtle distinction between the two aggressors ... advocating towards one of them, the Third Reich, principled defeatism, and towards the other, the Soviet Union, a restricted, temporary and conditional defeatism.”
What style! What thought!
 



On June 27, 1940, simultaneously with the news that Rumania ceded Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina to the Soviet Union, Stalin tersely informed the world, through his official news agency, the TASS, that new labor laws were in effect in the USSR.
TASS confined itself to the statement that the 7-hour day had been replaced by an 8-hour day, and that industry had shifted from a 6-day week (5 working days, one day off) to a 7-day week (six working days, one day off).
The 7-hour day was one of Stalin’s trump boasts, served up as irrefutable proof of the “victory of socialism in one country” and the “transition to communism.” Stalin himself used to discourse at great length upon it.
As a matter of fact, the 7-hour day did not at all flow from the successes of industrialization. It was originally introduced by Stalin as a political measure, serving as a weapon in the early days of Stalin’s struggle against Trotsky and the Left Opposition.
Now comes official admission by Stalin that another of his world-publicized achievements was nothing but a fraud.
 
Stalin’s Labor Laws of 1938
But the abolition of the 7-hour day and the 6-hour week is only one item in a new body of anti-labor legislation.
The goal Stalin pursues by his new laws is not a new one. It is identical with the goal envisioned by him in his legislation of December, 1938: turning Russian workers into a species of industrial serfs, binding them to the factories, making it impossible for them to leave their jobs, and in this way extricating his regime from the convulsions of its economic life, the inability to fulfill plans, the chronic shortage of goods etc.
The 1938 laws were the bureaucratic solution to the economic impasse in which Stalin’s regime found itself on the eve of the second world war. These laws depended for their effectiveness on the exercise of the bureaucracy’s economic power, i.e., firing, threat of unemployment. But the opposition of the masses frustrated the bureaucratic calculations. The acute scarcity of labor, the ease with which employment could be obtained, made it actually possible for the mass of workers to utilize Stalin’s own legislation against Stalin’s own aims.
His official press is now compelled to admit that the Soviet workers, prohibited by the 1938 ukase from leaving their jobs voluntarily, engaged in the practice of deliberately violating the 1938 laws and then insisting that the administration enforce these laws, i.e. fire them from the jobs, thereby “freeing" them to seek employment elsewhere, not infrequently in a different department of the very same plant!
 
Youth Fight Against Stalin
The guarded statistical data of Stalin’s press indicate beyond any doubt that the labor turnover reached its peak precisely in the months following the 1938 decrees; that productive levels have fallen sharply; and that, most important of all, the leading part in this muted struggle against Stalin’s regime is being played by the youngest generation of workers, i.e., those who passed through the Stalinist school, who know nothing of the period of the Civil War and of the October days, and who have just entered industry.
The alarm and fury of the bureaucracy is expressed in brimstone editorials against “a certain section, namely 3-4% of young workers and employes who have recently entered industry; who are seeking to profit from the absence of unemployment which has been destroyed by the Soviet power; who are abusing the patience of the Soviet government by running from factory to factory, undermining discipline, refusing to toil honestly, disrespectfully deporting themselves toward the observation of regulations established by law and approved by the people” (Shvernik’s report to the Ninth Plenum of the Central Council of the Russian Trade Unions).
The June 1940 laws are Stalin’s solution to the economic impasse, further aggravated by the demands of war time economy, the vast losses during the Finnish campaign, not to mention the economic commitments to Hitler. The aggravated situation demands an intensification of bureaucratic pressure, the only remedy the bureaucracy knows or can apply. The need now is for new penalties. For these, Stalin has to dig deep into his police armament.
 
Savage Penalties in New Laws
The new laws make it a crime against the state for any worker to leave his job, come late to work, skip a single work day, fail to produce his daily quota or “norm”.
Any attempt to leave one’s place of employment, even a mere request to be allowed to seek employment elsewhere, is a crime punishable by imprisonment for a term of 2–4 months.
The penalty for arriving late to work, skipping a work day, or otherwise “dawdling” on the job is equally unprecedented in the history of labor legislation. Any one charged with these “crimes” is subject to a sentence of 6 months penal labor at the place of his or her employment, i.e., the factory, mill, mine or office. In addition, up to 25% of the criminal’s regular wages are withheld. The exact period of time over which these wages are to be withheld is not specified in the ukase. It is to be assumed that these sums will be withheld for at least the duration of the sentence. Thus Stalin has turned every enterprise in the Soviet Union into a forced labor camp, or work-jail. The ukase decreeing all this was published in all the Russian papers on June 26. It went into effect on June 27. Kalinin countersigned it, issuing it in the name of the Executive Committee of the Supreme Council of the Soviet Union.
It was accompanied by a supplementary ukase, in the name of the People’s Commissars and countersigned by Molotov, establishing drastic wage cuts.
As Shvernik explained: “In order to further strengthen the defensive power of their fatherland the working class of the USSR must go forward to necessary sacrifices.”
“The lengthening of the working day is most closely bound up with the question of wages,” continued Shvernik. “An objection may be raised that the proportionate increase of the working day must be accompanied, if you please, by a similar increase in wages. It would be absolutely incorrect to pose the question in this way. Were we to permit an increase of wages proportionate to the increase of the working day, then there could not even be talk of any necessary sacrifices. But we are precisely talking about this, that the working class and the entire intelligentsia must make those sacrifices which are indispensable for the defense of our fatherland.” (Bolshevik, No. 11–12, June 1940)
The section of the ukase pertaining to piecework wages reads:
“That the norms of output be raised and piece-work rates be lowered in proportion to the increased working day.”
It might appear at first glance that this implies only an indirect wage cut, that is, a worker may now work longer hours and be paid less per piece but his wages remain the same as before. Not so. In reality, a direct wage cut is involved.
 
A 14% Wage Cut!
The “increased working day” includes not only the “extra” hour each day but also an “extra” 8-hour day in the week. A worker now receives the same wages for six days of work and one day off as he did for five days work and one day off. In other words, if the meager wage formerly had to cover six days of existence, it must now be stretched over 7 days. A wage cut of one-seventh.
Workers on monthly or weekly salaries are similarly situated. Let us take a period of 42 days which best illustrates the difference between the two systems. If hitherto there were in this interval 7 weeks and 7 paydays (on a 6-day week basis), now there are only 6 weeks and 6 pay days. But on each pay day the wage received is the same as before, otherwise, according to Shvernik, there would be “no sacrifice”. Therefore each worker must now sacrifice one week’s wages in every seven.
Thus, in one and the same operation, the Russian workers must not only labor 48 hours in place of the previous 35 hours, but they also find their already miserable standard of living sharply lowbred. And this, on Stalin’s “threshold to Communism”!
That Stalin’s own press, under the ten-fold censorship that has prevailed since the signing of the Stalin-Hitler Pact, is forced to speak out so openly is in itself incontestable proof of the unfolding struggle of the Soviet workers against Stalin’s regime.
 
First Results of New Laws
The first consequence of the new legislation was the cutting down of the labor force in every enterprise in the Soviet Union. With the “increased” productivity per worker, less workers are now required. In the reports published in the Pravda 40 and 50 per cent cuts in the labor force are not uncommon. This is done, in part, in order to overcome the acute shortage of labor from which Soviet industry is chronically suffering; at the same time, the bureaucracy no doubt hopes thereby to accumulate a labor reserve from which to draw in order to replace those workers who are jailed, and as an added pressure on the recalcitrants already employed.
As Trotsky predicted, under the blows of the war crisis, facing its first real test, the bureaucracy is compelled to strip off its veil and reveal its true self to the masses.
How are the Russian workers reacting to the new legislation? Here too the Stalinist press involuntarily supplies us with facts that disclose the deepening crisis.
The ritualistic paeans in the press glorifying the new laws and promising miraculous results (there was even an attempt to raise the slogan “The Third Stalin Five Year Plan in Four Years”) were almost immediately followed by fulminations against “rotten liberals” who hesitate to enforce the new laws and who “patronize floaters and laggards”. This attack is aimed against the public prosecutors and the directors of plants and heads of departments who have teen invested with “undivided authority” and “sole responsibility.” The Pravda for July already carries reports of severe jail sentences meted out to prosecutors and to directors of industry who “failed” to exercise their new authority. The real explanation for this “hesitancy” lies obviously in the pressure from below which is being counteracted from above by increased lashing of the apparatus.
The Komsomol (Russian Y.C.L.), an organization now reportedly comprising 10 million Russian youth, is under fire and is being held responsible for the misbehavior of the young generation of workers. Its apparatus is being purged.
It is the dread of this development that impelled Stalin to hasten at all costs his long planned assassination of Leon Trotsky. The Fourth International, founded and led by Leon Trotsky, alone has the political program for the Russian workers, and their brothers the world over. By assassinating Trotsky, Stalin hopes that he has now decapitated the world movement, and especially the politicalization of the opposition in Russia which has now assumed mass proportions, which is developing a young leading cadre but which is still groping for a political program. Today, however, the waves of the rising deluge are lapping at Stalin’s feet; tomorrow the tide of the resurgent workers of the Soviet Union and the whole world will engulf him..
 






Number to Be Purged Is Raised by Izvestia
In his report to the Tenth Plenum of the Central Committee of the Trade Unions as reported by Pravda, Shvernik had announced that 108,000 paid functionaries would be dropped from the rolls. As we explained in last week’s Appeal, this means ousting a majority of the union functionaries. This figure it now turns out is a typographical error, the actual number involved is 128,000. “The Commission of the CCTU which is investigating the personnel of the trade unions has found it necessary to cut the apparatus by dropping 128,000 people.” (Izvestia, July 30)
In the same issue Izvestia declares; “It should be pointed out that the reduction of the paid workers in the trade union organizations is not taking place without resistance.” Could this perhaps be a subtle hint to Comrade Shvernik and his confrères?



*
(This is the third in a series of articles on the present crisis in the Soviet Union)
The collapse of the Third Five Year Plan in industry is accompanied by equally grave developments on the agricultural front.
In June, 1934, Comrade Trotsky predicted that war-time conditions in the Soviet Union under Stalin would lead to the following consequences in agriculture:
“Under the influence of the critical need of the state for articles of prime necessity, the individualistic tendencies of the peasant economy will receive a considerable reinforcement, and the centrifugal forces within the kolkhozes (the collective farms) will increase with every month of war.” (War and the Fourth International)
Reality has verified this prediction. Under war-time conditions that have existed in the USSR since the signing of the Stalin-Hitler pact the individualistic tendencies have been growing by leaps and bounds.
There was a forced growth of these tendencies even prior to the outbreak of war. The text of the new income laws issued on April 9, 1940 contains the following, declaration: “The fiscal income of handicraft workers ... has increased from 2.557 billion roubles to 5.133 billion roubles in 1938, that is, it doubled in four years.” “Handicraft work” is of course outside the collectives. But the functioning of the collectives was not seriously impaired during this period.
The very first year of war-time conditions, however, found the peasants reducing the Spring sowing, delaying deliveries to the state, concentrating more and more on the cultivation of their own land strips, engaging more extensively in selling in the open market.
And now in 1940, despite the most rigid censorship, it is apparent that the individualistic tendencies within the collectives have grown to the point of endangering the very existence of the collectives.
This year’s Spring sowing has been the worst on record since the terrible period of forced collectivization. The collective farmers are refusing to fulfill plan-quotas.
Mr. Gedye, the Moscow correspondent of the N.Y. Times, enumerates from Bulgaria the following items, which he had gathered from the official Stalinist press, and which the Moscow censors refused to pass:
“Izvestia’s editorial on bad state of Spring sowing ... Reference to Izvestia’s editorial saying ‘Izvestia once again calls attention to bad Spring sowing’ ... Soviet press statement, ‘No single republic fulfilled the potato plan last year’ ... Official report showing cotton sowing decreased by nearly 30 per cent since last year ... Figures for price increases of necessities, varying from 25 to 150 per cent.” (N.Y. Times, Sept. 14)
Revealing as these newspaper editorials, comments, figures, etc. are, the administrative and repressive measures adopted to cope with the situation serve to disclose even more graphically the critical condition of agriculture.
 
Applying the Lash to the Peasants
New laws are now in effect governing deliveries of staple crops to the state. Hitherto these deliveries were based on a fixed proportion of the acreage sown and harvested.
On April 1, a ukase was issued fixing a new standard, independent of the actual crop hut based on the total number of acres at the disposal of the collective farms.
The purpose of this emergency decree is twofold. Stalin hopes thereby to compel the collectives to carry out the sowing plans. But a more immediate goal is pursued. Through this administrative measure, the regime seeks to obtain from the kolkhozes a greater share of the sharply reduced 1940 crop, which has fallen so far below the plan that state-deliveries on the old basis would be catastrophically short of the needs of the cities for the coming winter, and would mean the depletion of accumulated reserve stocks. Here, then, we have the first stage of a thinly disguised return to forced collections.
Several other decrees followed. On April 11, a ukase ordered “obligatory deliveries of grain and rice”; on April 16 came another ordering “obligatory deliveries of potatoes.”
In the text of the April 6th ukase it is suddenly proclaimed that the old policy of the regime fostered “an urge on the part of the kolkhozes to reduce the plans for sowing grain, oil seed, potatoes, resulting in a reduction of areas sown for these crops.”
 
Prefer Working for Themselves
Translated into human language this bureaucratic formula means that peasants find it far more profitable to tend their own land strips, and that they prefer to sow and harvest those crops which bring highest prices in the market.
Pravda devotes its entire editorial on June 16 to “stressing” the need of rigid discipline in the collective farms. The kolkhoz members, admits Pravda, are spending only the bare minimum on work in the collectives while devoting their main energies to their own enterprises.
Leading party members in Orel are singled out for attack. While themselves members of the kolkhoz, these party members are spending all their time on their own land strips. (Pravda, June 17).
 
The Peasants Are Resisting
The peasants are resisting by either delaying state-deliveries or refusing to make them altogether. The favorite pretext is lack of transport. While awaiting the trucks to come and gather the grain due to the state, the peasants are using their horse and ox-drawn vehicles to carry their own produce to the open market.
The columns of the official press are filled with “alarm signals” which are strikingly reminiscent of the “kulak grain strike” of 1928–1929.
In the Kuubishev district no deliveries were made in July (Pravda, August 2). Report from Voronezh: Delay in harvesting crops causing enormous losses. “Many kolkhozniks systematically refrain from coming to work, they prefer to take trips to the market” (Pravda, August 3). Report from the Starominsk district: Grain is rotting in the fields (Pravda, August 5). Literally by the hundred the reports are coming in, monotonously the same: no deliveries ... arrears in deliveries ... crops rotting in the field ... collective farmers busy with their own affairs ...
 
Stalin’s Latest Decree
On August 7, Pravda prints a special resolution on state-deliveries, signed by Stalin, in the name of the Central Committee of the Party, and by Molotov, in the name of the Council of People’s Commissars.
The decree begins with the warning that it is “impermissible for the Party, the Soviet and the Agricultural organs to repeat last year’s mistakes when the harvest was excessively delayed which led to large losses in crops in a number of Republics, Regions and Provinces owing to the negligent attitude of the leaders of the total organizations. The beginning of the grain harvest shows that these mistakes are again being repeated in a whole series of regions.” (Our emphasis)
This preamble is followed by the statement that state deliveries are lagging behind or are not being made at all. Especially singled out are the Provinces of Omsk, Chelyabinsk and Kuubishev, the District of Krasnoyarsk and the Autonomous Republic of Bashkira “where many leading party and Soviet workers proved to be captives of the anti-state tendencies of isolated kolkhozes and kolkhozniki, and as a consequence of this, the plan of grain deliveries was not fulfilled and serious arrears have accumulated in the obligatory deliveries of grain.”
In the History of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union accredited to none other than Stalin himself, it is stated: “The collective farm peasantry, as the Sixteenth Party Congress stated in one of its resolutions, had become ‘a real and firm mainstay of the Soviet Power’.” (p. 312) Expressed here is Stalin’s most cherished hope that his regime could be stabilized by the “prosperous collectives.” Now another of Stalin’s world-publicized boasts has been exploded.
We have not long to wait before news comes of purges of the “party, Soviet and Administrative organs” in the rural areas, together with another drive against the “anti-state elements” in the collectives. Pravda for August already carries accounts of the first trials of the administrative personnel of the kolkhozes.
The rumblings of the “kulak danger” are about to break into a storm that must exceed in its fury the ravages of the previous struggle against the peasantry.
 
Soviet Workers Resisting Stalin’s Anti-Labor Laws
That Soviet workers are striking and in other ways resisting Stalin’s anti-labor legislation was revealed officially by Pravda itself in a leading editorial which stated:
“CERTAIN FLOATERS AND DAWDLERS ARE INVENTING ALL SORTS OF LOOPHOLES WHEREBY TO EVADE THE LAW. SOME ARE CUNNINGLY PROVIDING THEMSELVES WITH SWINDLE-NOTES FROM THE POLYCLINICS, OTHERS ARE LOAFING AND IDLING AWAY THEIR TIME DURING WORK HOURS.” (Pravda, August 5)
Never before has Stalin’s official press allowed itself any reference, no matter how veiled, to strikes on the job or other forms of mass resistance on the part of the workers. If it does so now in so thinly disguised form, then it must mean that a mass-scale resistance is involved, and that the apparatus of repression must be lashed into action to overcome it..
 



Stalin is now in the midst of a new mass purge.
The first to suffer are the Komsomol (Russian Communist Youth) and the Trade Unions. Already purged, according to official statistics, are 137,637. Of this number 29,637 are Komsomol officials (out of a reported total of 45,580, that is, the purge has hit a 65 per cent majority of the Komsomol apparatus); and a somewhat more modest majority of 53 per cent of the Trade Union apparatus, 108,000 officials out of a reported total of 203,821. A major operation, even for Stalin.
Whereas previous man-hunts were ostensibly conducted against “wreckers, diversionists, saboteurs, traitors, agents of the Mikado, agents of the Gestapo, agents of French, English and other imperialisms,” etc., in a word, against “Trotskyites”, this manhunt is termed one against darmoyedniki (scoundrels who eat bread that they haven’t earned) and bezdelniki (rascals who idle away their time).
In their milder moments, and of course under their breath, the Soviet masses must have doubtless applied these homely and colloquial epithets of darmoyednik and bezdelnik to many a bureaucrat. But to have used these terms in public meant an invitation to the cellars of the GPU and a bullet in the back of the head. Stalin is now, however, compelled to apply them, if not to the whole bureaucracy, at least to the purged section.
 
Stalin Must Expose His Imitators
Stalin today finds it necessary, as we shall describe, to reveal the true visage of his henchmen, their arbitrary rule, their parasitism, their vast padded staffs, embezzlements, petty grafts – even their complete isolation from the masses.
The bureaucratic summits of the Kremlin find it now necessary to indict the lesser and lower bureaucratic ranks for those very crimes and abominations which flourish below only as a pale reflection of the monstrosities at the top.
The majority of the Komsomol and the Trade Union officialdom has been charged with and has (naturally) pleaded guilty to: 1) lack of contact with the masses; 2) absence of a democratic regime; 3) failure to call not only membership meetings, ‘but even committee meetings; 4) the upkeep of a swollen apparatus by diversion of membership dues and even sums allotted to industry; 5) padding the payrolls with darmoyedniki and bezdelnikj and of similar practices, labelled, in the official double-talk, as “deficiencies.”
 
Cabled Stories Suppressed by Stalin
No correspondent has been permitted to cable this story from the Soviet Union as, likewise, the story of Stalin’s new anti-labor legislation which I described last week. Even the provisions of the new laws against labor, which of course were published in Pravda for the information of the bureaucrats, were deleted from press dispatches, as Gedye of the New York Times has just reported upon leaving the Soviet Union. Moreover, for months at a time it is impossible to secure abroad copies of Soviet newspapers. We are now, however, able to tell the story.
On July 26 Pravda carried an innocuous notice to the effect that the Tenth Plenum of the All-Union Central Council of Trade Unions (C.C.T.U.) would convene on the next day, with only one point on the agenda: “The Elimination of Certain Deficiencies in the Trade Union Apparatus and the Improvement of the Functioning of the Trade Union Organs.” In point of understatement this notice can be matched only by the wording of the announcement of the Ninth Plenum of the C.C.T.U., held a month previously, which it turned out, demanded “in the name of the Soviet trade unionists” the passage of the new anti-labor legislation, but which was called, said the announcement, to consider “The Question of the 8 Hour Day.” The style is the regime.
The members of the Plenum were graciously greeted on July 27 with a special editorial in Pravda addressed to the Plenum and entitled: You Must Attract Broad Masses to Active Trade Union Work.
After an innocent and ritualistic introduction in which homage was paid to the achievements and importance of Trade Unions in Socialist Society and after affirming that “without their participation not a single serious economic or political measure is carried out,” the editorial suddenly interposed an ominous “BUT”.
 
What the “Trade Unions” Really Are
“But,” snarled Pravda, “many leading workers in the Trade Unions forget the main thing; they forget mass work; they forget to maintain constant contact with the masses; they take to the road of functioning in an office-bureaucratic manner through an enormous paid apparatus; and not infrequently they transform the trade union into a poorly functioning departmental bureau. These deficiencies are glaringly revealed in countless instances of a swollen paid trade union apparatus in individual enterprises, in departments as well as in regional committees and in Central Committees of the Trade Unions.” (Pravda, July 27)
To its horror and indignation, Pravda had suddenly discovered that the Moscow Auto Plant alone supports 931 paid trade union officials. The Gorki Auto Plant is in an equally insufferable position with 648. “It is instructive,” continues Stalin’s official organ, “that the paid staff of certain trade unions does not decrease but on the contrary is increasing from year to year.” For example, the State Trade Workers Union had 2,807 officials in 1938; it was then split up into six independent unions and the paid staff increased to 3,546.
 
Squandering the Workers’ Dues
Pravda immediately trumps that (by citing no less instructive instances of how cultural educational work is carried on. The workers in the Moscow Auto Plant, it appears, got together and organized a chorus and a dramatic circle. No sooner did the Trade Union learn of this than it appointed: One Chorus Leader, salary 800 roubles; one Assistant Chorus Leader, salary 500 roubles; one Art Director, 1,000 roubles; one Chief Concertmaster, 600 roubles; one Theatre Manager, 750 roubles ... Pravda cuts its description of this payroll short with a modest though mysterious “Etcetera” and goes on:
“Facts of this kind, and they are by no means isolated ones, bear witness to the fact that many trade unions are squandering the income of the trade unions, maintaining at the expense of this income a swollen paid apparatus, in some cases, plain Darmoyedniki and Bezdelniki.”
After this discovery, Pravda is ready to tell the Plenum just how to attract the masses:
“This situation can no longer be tolerated ... The main portion of the funds accruing from membership dues must be expended not on the upkeep of a paid apparatus but to provide cultural-educational service to union members and to render them material aid.”
The Tenth Trade Union Plenum was well attended by the Chairmen and Secretaries of the Central Committees of the various Trade Unions as well as by “several hundred Moscow trade union activists (read: the G.P.U. – JGW).”
 
Shvernik in the Confessional
The reporter to the Plenum was Shvernik, Tomsky’s successor as Chairman of the C.C.T.U. The account in Pravda gives only the high lights from his speech.
Following the line laid down by Pravda, he began by pointing out the achievements and importance of the Trade Unions, especially “on the threshold of Communism”. The main source of trade union strength, said Shvernik, consists of ties with the masses. But unfortunately, he had to report that the Soviet Trade Unions “have still very weak ties with the masses.” Why? Because of the “swollen apparatus of the trade union organizations.”
“The paid apparatus devours the major part of the membership dues which should provide the means for carrying on cultural mass work and rendering material aid to union members and which are used instead by the trade union organs to maintain not a few Darmoyedniki and Bezdelniki.” (Pravda, July 28)
Who should know if not Shvernik?
At this point, however, Shvernik digressed to make it clear that this “deficiency” was discovered not by him, nor by the C.C.T.U., nor by the various trade union organizations, not even by Pravda but only by the Central Committee of the Party (i.e., Stalin).
 
The Scope of the Purge
After a proper pause, Shvernik announced to the assembled audience that it was now crystal clear that the paid staff could easily be cut one-half, even two-thirds. As a matter of fact, a Commission which had already studied the problem found it “possible to drop 108,000 paid workers from 169 trade union bodies.”
“After their staffs are reduced,” predicted Shvernik, “the Trade Unions will have the untrammelled opportunity of carrying on their work on the income derived from membership dues, and our state will obtain several hundred million roubles to use for further strengthening the economic power of our socialist fatherland.”
In closing he promised a new regime. “It is necessary to call general membership meetings of the trade unions regularly.”
The discussion which ensued was summed up by Pravda as follows:
“The speakers cited a great number of instances which illustrate the urgent need of liquidating the deficiencies in trade union work, paring down the swollen staffs and attracting the activists.”
Moisseyev, Chairman of the Central Committee, of the Central Construction Workers Union, announced to the Plenum that the paid personnel of his Union had already been cut “70 per cent, a saving of about 11 million roubles.”
Meshakin, Chairman of the Flour Mill and Grain Elevator Workers Union, was able to announce a reduction of 59.5 per cent.
But the speakers really warmed up to their task only during the next day’s discussion, which Pravda summed up with satisfaction as follows:
“Every one who took the floor spoke of the excessively swollen apparatus which devours hundreds of millions of roubles and obstructs the advancement of trade union activists” (Pravda, July 30).
Levine, Secretary of the Central Committee of the Ural and West Siberian Industrial Construction Workers Union confessed that: “We reduced our staff 15–18 per cent last February. But it became immediately clear to us that this was not enough. We have now dropped 876 out of 1,401 on our staff.”
 
An Astounding Admission
Moskatov, one of the Secretaries of the C.C.T.U., displayed exemplary zeal: “Suffice it to state that 25 Central Committees of the Trade Unions spent from 100 to 134 per cent of the total membership dues collected in order to maintain their apparatus.” He also singled out one Central Committee which contrived to expend on its apparatus “1,820,000 roubles while receiving dues to the sum of 1,350,000. Not so much as a kopek of the membership dues was spent on cultural work. More than that, the salaries of the trade union workers swallowed up in addition funds assigned to industrial organs.” If so much is admitted, what must be the whole truth?
In his book The Revolution Betrayed Trotsky refers to a scandal which broke in 1930 when it was revealed that “out of the budget of the trade unions, amounting to 400,000,000 roubles 80,000,000 go for the support of the personnel.” That was 20 per cent of the dues.
In 1940, admissions are blithely made of 100 to 134 per cent of the dues expended for the support of darmoyedniki and bezdelniki. Here is a slight measure of the degeneration of the bureaucracy since 1930.
 
The Income of the Bureaucracy
Vladimirov, with the preservation of his own skin and salary uppermost in his mind, blurted out that at the beginning of 1940 the Frozen-Meat Workers Union carried 1,354 officials whose salaries totaled “more than 6 million roubles.” The personnel was now cut 70 per cent, saving “many millions”. The average annual wage of the bureaucrats in this union, therefore, was in excess of 4,400 roubles. This sum does not include, of course, the special privileges enjoyed by the darmoyedniki and bezdelniki, namely, choice city apartments, country homes, vacation tours, sanatoria, private use of cars, etc. The average annual wage in the Soviet Union was officially put at 3,467 roubles (1938). For the mass of Soviet workers 1,800 roubles a year is a high wage. For the first time, we have an “official” gauge of the portion of the national income devoured by these self-admitted sloths and idlers.
But the most revealing data was cited by K. Nikolayeva, another of the Secretaries of the C.C.T.U., who in her anxiety not to be outdone, became overzealous and said the following:
“The swelling of the apparatus was noticed neither by the leaders of the Central Committees of the Trade Unions nor even (!) by us, the members of the Presidium of the C.C.T.U. We were under the impression that our paid staff was a trifle over 150,000 and now it turns out that in 1939 there were 194,434 paid workers in 179 trade unions, while in 1940 there were 203,821. The sum spent on them amounted to 1,025,385,600 roubles.”
With the above figures as a basis, the average annual wage of a trade union bureaucrat rises above 5,100 roubles.
 
And These Are the Smaller Leeches!
The total annual wage fund for the whole USSR was officially given as 34.95 billion in 1933 and 96.4 billion roubles in 1938. If a single one of the feebler branches of the bureaucracy swallowed up 1.02 billion a year, then how much was devoured by the assassins of the GPU, the leeches in the government apparatus and other more powerful branches up to the Supreme Gang in the Kremlin itself?
The discussion closed with a rabid attack on Trud, the official organ of the Trade Unions. The Trud is conducting “a poor fight in the struggle to eliminate deficiencies”. Even the editors of Trud do not relish apparently the prospect of losing 70 per cent and more of their subscribers.
Naturally, there is an intimate connection between this purge in July and the resistance of the masses to the June anti-labor legislation. The press has already been compelled to report thousands of violations.
 
Why Stalin’s New Scapegoats
Stalin must have new scapegoats; once again he has to resort to preventive measures. The familiar pattern of the purge reappears, but this time with significant alterations.
The preventive character of the purge finds its expression in the fact that the fire is levelled first against those sections of the bureaucracy which are most directly subject to mass pressure. The Youth and the Trade Unions must be discredited, and above all rendered immune to pressure from below. At the same time, as a sop to the masses, a section of the bureaucracy is sacrificed. Stalin undoubtedly aims to limit the purge. But like all its predecessors, this purge has a logic of its own and must penetrate every nook and cranny of the regime. The masses will respond warmly and in their own way to such slogans as:
“Down with All Darmoyedniki and Bezdelniki, with Stalin at Their Head!”.
 



(This is the fourth of a series of articles on the present crisis in the Soviet Union)
The 1940 purge penetrated by the end of July and the first week in August – later issues of Soviet papers haven’t arrived – into four Commissariats: The Ship Building Industry, Electrical Industry, Non-Ferrous Metallurgy, and the Oil Industry.
In the first two, only the deputies of the People’s Commissar and the members of the Collegium have been purged to date. In the Commissariat of Non-Ferrous Metallurgy, the People’s Commissar Samokhvalov was removed together with his deputies. In the case of the Commissariat of the Oil Industry, the personage lopped off was none other than L. Kaganovich. Stalin’s own “Iron Commissar”, “Chief Trouble Shooter,” etc.
In the People’s Commissariat of War, matters have progressed several stages beyond the initial and preparatory move made several weeks ago: the replacement of Voroshilov by Timoshenko. Marshal Shaposhnikov has been retired (“ill health”) from his post and General K.A. Meretskov appointed in his place as head of the General Staff.
Marshal Budenny, the third of the three Marshals who survived the 1938 purge has been relieved of his post as Commander of the Moscow Military District.
Zhdanov has been removed from his position as chief of the Department of Party Propaganda and now occupies the decorative position of “supervisor”.
 
Molotov Is Surrounded
With Kaganovich, Zhdanov, Budenny and Voroshilov skidding to oblivion, the question naturally arises: Is Molotov immune?
Within the recent weeks Stalin has surrounded his Chairman of the Council of People’s Commissars with three brand new deputies: Voroshilov, Vyshinsky and Mekhlis. Voroshilov, as is well known, was kicked upstairs for the time being which explains his presence on the premises. But the promotion of Vyshinsky and Mekhlis?
The whole world is familiar with the character and role of Vyshinsky, the Prosecutor of the infamous Moscow Trials. Mekhlis is not so well known outside of the Soviet Union. He first took his orders direct from Stalin in the capacity of personal secretary. Stalin then promoted him to the editorship of the Pravda. When Stalin undertook the purge of the Red Army, the man he selected, as head of the Army’s Political Department in place of the executed Gamarnik, was this same Mekhlis, who upon direct orders from Stalin massacred the flower of the Red Army (the estimate of victims ranges from 20–40,000). In August of this year, Stalin decided that the job in the Red Army had been completed. In June came the appointment of more than a thousand new generals; in August the undivided authority of the officer corps was restored and the Political Department, abolished altogether.
But Mekhlis was not abolished. Stalin promoted him to two posts: Molotov’s deputy in the Council of People’s Commissars, and head of the newly created State Control Commission. Nobody knows as yet just what are the powers and functions of this new Commission. But the mere fact that Mekhlis heads it cannot fail to arouse unpublished thoughts in Molotov’s head. No! With such three deputies Molotov can hardly be classified among those whom the insurance companies designate as “good risk.”
 
Red Army “Re-Organized”
The army is the quintessence of a regime. “The army is a copy of society and suffers from all its diseases, usually at a higher temperature” (Trotsky). How is the internal crisis of the Stalin regime mirrored in the army?
The transfer of Voroshilov, the shift of Budenny, the replacement of Shaposhnikov, the abolition of the Political Department in the Army, the restoration of undivided authority of the officers’ corps, has been supplemented by the appointment of hundreds of Admirals and Generals. The new officers’ corps has (been raised to Czarist splendor. Titles abhorred by the Russian masses as the very symbols of the Czarist autocracy have been legalized by ukase.
The appointments in the Navy include:



RANK


No.




Admirals


    3




Vice Admirals


    8




Rear Admirals


  63




Lieutenant Generals


  4




Major Generals


  30




Total:


108



The appointments in the Army are as follows:



RANK


No.




Generals


    3




Colonel Generals


    7




Lieutenant Generals


116




Major Generals


827




Total:


953



Of the thousand-odd appointees in the Army and Navy not a single one, to our knowledge, played a role of even tenth-rate importance either in the October revolution or the Civil War. Many of them, as appears from the photographs carried by Pravda in issue after issue in June, are youngsters; most of them are in their thirties or early forties. They are men of the Stalinist conscription; they owe everything to Stalin. The same thing applies to the lower officer ranks.
Of the the full-fledged Generals at the apex of this newly appointed military hierarchy only one, I.V. Tulenev, is credited with a Civil War record. This nonentity is now provided with a synthetic record: “one of those who helped forge the First Cavalry Corps.” His subsequent achievements are on the same level as these forged Civil War credentials: He participated in the “emancipatory advance into Western Ukraine” in 1939.
One of his colleagues, G.K. Zhukov, reportedly played an important role in the clashes with the Japanese on the Manchurian and Outer Mongolian borders. The other, K.A. Meretskov, the Commander of the Leningrad Military District, fell into disrepute last winter during the dismal failure of the first offensive against Finland and is now acclaimed as the hero of the “break through the Mannerheim line” (Pravda, June 5). Meretskov is the new head of the General Staff.
 
Preparing a Military Dictatorship?
Pravda explained the appointment of this veritable army of Generals as intending to “elevate the authority of our commanding staff, and still further to reinforce the complete authority of army commanders.” (Idem)
The aim pursued by Stalin is, by giving a new social weight to the summits of a hierarchical military caste, to bind the Generals to himself.
When the news of Voroshilov’s removal as Commissar of War was first reported, we concluded that “Stalin is staking everything on the new officers’ caste which now acquires an enormous specific weight, and a degree of power and independence never before attained by the Soviet officers’ corps, and this – under war-time conditions” (Socialist Appeal, May 18, 1940). This has been corroborated by Stalin’s latest moves. In the light of these developments, the question now poses itself: Is Stalin preparing the ground for a military dictatorship?
 
The Purge in Industry
The administrative personnel of the Soviet industry is confronted with a fate similar to that suffered by the personnel of the trade union bureaucracy. They are being purged much in the same manner as were the trade unions. Industry, too, it is now declared, has been operating in an “office-bureaucratic manner”, with vast padded staffs, embezzlements, graft, etc. etc.
The complete picture as depicted by Stalin’s own press and on Stalin’s own orders is not yet available to us – the papers haven’t “arrived” yet – but we are in position to sketch the background.
Pashin, the People’s Commissar of the Machine-Building Industry, in his “exposure” of the office-bureaucratic way in which his particular Commissariat has been functioning, revealed that according to official computations “the central office of (his) People’s Commissariat has issued 40,000 different orders, regulations and directives in the space of a single year.” This represents, so to speak, the volume of export. The inflow from the main departments under this central office amounted to “more than 180,000 various instructions which arrived by mail” (Pravda, June 15).
Why this deluge? Who writes these letters? Pravda replies: “People who are afraid of responsibility; people who seek to insure themselves against any contingency with all kinds of documentary alibis.”
On July 10th the Kremlin issued a ukase prohibiting the “production of defective goods” by the Soviet industry. “It is a crime equivalent to wrecking,” reads the ukase. The directors, the chief engineers and the heads of technical control are held directly responsible for the quality of manufactured goods,, machines, output of coal and metal mines, etc. The crime is punishable by prison terms of five to eight years.
What a commentary on the quality of Soviet industrial production!
There is hardly a plant in the Soviet Union today whose directors, engineers, etc., would not immediately be liable under the law. Thus, it provides the most convenient formula for the purge. With this decree as a whip over the “technical cadre” Stalin hopes to supply the necessary quota of scapegoats.
Several trials have already been held and a number of administrators and engineers are already serving their prison terms. The reason given for the “demotion” of Samokhvalov, former People’s Commissar of Non-Ferrous Metallurgy, was that he had allowed “violations of fixed standards and the worsening of the quality of certain forms of production” (Izvestia, July 10).
The immediate effects of this decree, as Pravda itself was compelled to report, were that many factories actually shut down; machine plants did not produce a single machine; directors of coal mines instructed that their impure daily output be stored in warehouses. (Pravda, July 13).
 






This is the fifth of a series of articles on the present crisis in the Soviet Union. The “June laws” to which it refers were described in detail in previous articles. These laws abolished the 35-hour week (7-hour day, 5-day week, with the 6th day off), decreed in its stead the 48-hour week (8-hour day, 6-day week with the 7th day off), made it a criminal offense to quit one’s job, punishable by forced-labor terms to be served at the same place of employment at 25% less pay, etc.



* * *
The Moscow press is engaged in a major campaign to “enforce the June laws”. All Soviet papers are under instruction to carry a special section devoted solely to the progress of the drive. In Pravda this section is headed: “We are Checking the Application of the June Laws.”
Pravda and Izvestia, prefer, for obvious reasons, to devote most space to individual violations. But in the Pravda alone we find from July 20 to August 4 a total of 5,093 violations divided as follows: (Only reports of 30 or more violations are listed by us)



Alma Ata


   102 violations




Several Leningrad plants (unnamed)


   272 violations




Ordjonikidze plant, Leningrad


   237 violations




Elektrostal plant


   146 violations




Another Leningrad plant


   170 violations




Gorki district (up to July 26)


3,540 violations




Single plant, Rostov-on-the-Don


     30 violations




Kirov Metallurgical plant, Stalino


   303 violations




Serp i Molot (Hammer & Sickle) plant


    220 violations




Single plant, Moscow


      35 violations




Single plant, Vladivostok


     38 violations




Total:


5,093 violations



At the beginning of August, general membership meetings of the party organizations were held all over the Soviet Union to place particular stress on the June laws. Not a single account thus far published either in Pravda or Izvestia even hints at successful fulfillment. Just the contrary.
For instance, Sedyuk, secretary of the Kiev party organization, reported that “in the enterprises of (his) province the ukase is being fulfilled poorly.” Another reporter from Krasnoyarsk cited “facts of violation of labor discipline in the enterprises of the (Krasnoyarsk) province.” Patolischev, secretary of the Yaroslavl Regional Committee stated: “In our city industry functioned no better in July than it did in June.” (Pravda, August 17)
 
Youth Lead Resistance
A.A. Kuznetsov, secretary of the Leningrad party organization reported cautiously, “Violations and self-willed departures have by and large decreased. But the number is still considerable. In certain enterprises the number of violations has increased instead of decreasing.” Secretary Vlassov reporting for the Saratov party organization, after painting the same dismal picture, added that 25 communists and 60 Komsomols (members of the Young Communist organization) were among the violators. (Pravda, August 18)
If in June Stalin was forced to disclose that the youth was in the forefront of the wave of resistance, in July he is compelled to reveal that members of the Komsomol stand at the head of the youth. Out of 237 “violators” in the important Ordjonikidze plant in Leningrad 52 were members of the Komsomol and ‘a ‘similar situation exists in many other enterprises.” (Pravda, July 27)
Nesterov, the director of the typographical plant Pechatny Dvor stressed the fact that “among the violators of labor discipline there are many youth” and concluded that the “great share of the blame for this falls on the do-nothing of Komsomol organization.” (Pravda, August 18)
Only lack of space prevents us from adducing scores of similar quotations. Here is how Pravda summed up the situation on August 11:
“The execution of the June 16 ukase of the Praesidium of the Supreme Council of the USSR is not taking place without resistance. Who is resisting the carrying out of measures which were unanimously approved by the Soviet people and which strengthen the economic and defensive power of our country? First and foremost, the resistance naturally comes from the laggards and floaters, i.e., those against whom the barb of the law is aimed.”
 
Resistance Caught Kremlin Unawares
Apparently the Kremlin had not expected such resistance.
On July 25 the Pravda had pilloried those directors of industry who “failed to exercise their sole authority” in enforcing the June laws, and who tried instead to shift the responsibility to the trade unions and the party organizations.
“Worthless indeed is the industrial leader,” said, the editorial, “who tries to evade responsibility for the conditions in and the functioning of his enterprise, and who seeks to hide behind the party and trade union organizations. It is a fact that some directors are trying to transfer the enforcement (of the ukase) upon the party and trade union organizations.”
A week later, the Pravda had to eat its own words, and had to announce editorially in bold type that a special plenum of Central Committee had changed the “line”.
“This ukase is not being carried out satisfactorily,” admitted the Pravda. “... Today the main task of all party organizations with regard to industry is to assure the direction and control of the enforcement of the regulations affecting the change to the 8-hour day and 7-day week and the prohibition of self-willed departure of workers and employees from enterprises and departments.” (Pravda, August 1. Emphasis in the original)
What about the trade unions? A rectification on this point was not long delayed, either. On August 28, Izvestia addressed those trade union functionaries who survived the July purge:
“The trade union organizations must center their work among the masses around the question of strengthening labor discipline and struggling against the disorganization of production. It is impossible to reconcile oneself to the fact that many trade union organizations stand on the side-lines, shying away from control over the unswerving enforcement of the ukase of the Praesidium of the Supreme Council of the USSR in the enterprises and institutions.”
The next day, Izvestia stated:
“The realization of the June 26th ukase is still being carried out unsatisfactorily in many enterprises. The circumstance that violations and labor turnover are still declining slowly while labor productivity is not registering any noticeable growth constitute evidence that in these factories the directors, the party and trade union organizations have still done far from everything in order to fulfill honestly and precisely the ukase of the Praesidium of the Supreme Council of the USSR.” (Izvestia, Aug. 29)
The courts and the prosecutors are likewise under fire. Many judges and prosecutors have been removed. By special ukase of August 10, all cases of violation of the labor laws will henceforth be heard by People’s Judges alone. No “people’s jury”.
In a special editorial entitled: Laggards and Floaters Must Be Ruthlessly Punished, Izvestia warned:
A “Long Term” Campaign
“Profoundly mistaken are those who think that the struggle against laggards and floaters is a short-term ‘campaign’. The Ukase of the Praesidium of the Supreme Council must be and will be carried into life constantly and unswervingly, precisely and rigorously.” (Izvestia, August 9)
In the space of a few weeks, Stalin thus has had to mobilize and purge his entire “public” apparatus, the factory administration, the trade unions and the party, not to mention the Komsomols and the courts, in an effort to stem the rising tide of mass resistance.
 



Puzzled America
By Sherwood Anderson.
287 pp. New York. Charles Scribner’s Sons. $2.50.
It is important that books of this kind should be written. It is unfortunate that this particular book is not better in its kind. Puzzled America is an assembly of sketches, “attempts at pictures of America now ... the result of a good deal of wandering about”. In such attempts the artist, if he is sensitive, honest, impersonal, can tell us much that we need to know. He can disclose states of mind, attitudes, conscious responses that individuals and even masses are making to the developing social process. To a limited, a very limited, extent Anderson accomplishes such a disclosure. In oddly assorted impressions of persons he met in the South and the Middle West, he shows the unstable, directionless mood that now possesses the country. He finds this mood variously reflected in miners, small business men, union textile workers, farmers, the unemployed. And, as we read on, the mood becomes more closely defined: it is not hopeless, but confused; it is not exhausted, but rather waiting; it is neither conservative nor revolutionary, but so far without formulated goal or aim.
Without making the mistake of overestimating psychological factors, it should be understood that such a mood is critical in a very real sense. It is critical because it cannot last for an length of time. It must find directions and set itself goals. This is the momentous decision; and, particularly for the middle classes, the decision will be determined in part at least by the clarity and strength with which the conscious social forces – the revolutionary party and the parties of reaction – formulate a direction and a goal. We complain sometimes that the long years of depression have failed to “radicalize the American masses” to the degree that might have been expected. But if it is true that this mood has now been widely attained; if it is true that Americans are finished with their four years of looking back to pre-1929 and are rapidly ending their two-year illusions of the milk and honey of the New Deal, then the depression has done its share. We cannot leave the whole job to history.
But Anderson has not limited himself to a recording of this mood. In earlier days Anderson systematically distorted the impressions he received through an odd sexual lens. In middle age he is abandoning sex for “the social problem”. I should be the last to maintain that a correct social position can make a man a good writer. But it is nevertheless true that a false social position can, at the present time, prevent a man from writing well, particularly if he tries to make social matters part of the content of his writing. This Anderson does; and we find Puzzled America shot through with what might be called social sentimentality, just as his earlier books were clouded by a special kind of sexual sentimentality. Let us hope that it is this, and not an impersonal reflection of the mood he is describing, that accounts for the emergence of the CCC, Rush Holt and Floyd Olson as the heroes of his book.
J.W.
 
Note by ETOL
1. In the printed edition of The New International the title of this review has been swapped in error with the neighboring article, which is entitled In Seach of Diana by Harry Roskolenkier.



Outline History of the CPSU
By N. Popov
2 vols., 414 + 460 pp. New York. International Publishers. $4.
The blurb on the cover states: “This the most authoritative book on the subject, was translated from ... the sixteenth Russian edition.” The publishers also recommend the book as “a systematic history”.
N. Popov, the author (together with his publishers) have only a single authority and a single system: and that is Stalinism.
Popov is a Stalinist stooge; he dishes up history not in accordance with facts but according to Stalin’s prescription. When Stalin-Yaroslavsky changes the prescription, all the big and little stooges change their history. The system, however, remains the same: falsification, vilification and abomination by omission and commission.
“The student of the works of Lenin and Stalin” has been served in English with the sixteenth edition. But he has not been told that it is the revised edition of a revised, revised, revised original edition.
Were even such a student as the publishers have in mind to compare the several revised editions, he might very readily be induced to take an oath that Popov was quintuplets, i.e., at least five historians, each using both hands and both feet at one and the same time to write not only in different languages, but with entirely different viewpoints, on utterly unrelated topics. He would also learn that these historical quintuplets have one thing in common. All the Popovs have neither regard nor occasion for history in general, or the history of the Bolshevik party in particular.
In his introduction to the fourth Russian edition of this “history” (Moscow 1927), Popov declared,
“I do not belong to the school of jury-box historians, if only because I have never had the occasion to occupy myself either with history in general or the history of the party in particular.”
Is this modesty? Emphatically, no. These are Popov’s credentials to guarantee his Master faithful service.
How else could Popov serve as the “most authoritative, and systematic”?
How else could Popov qualify himself to serve originally as lecturer on party history in the city of Kharkov, in the Artemovsk University, during the term of 1924–1925?
With ignorance as his diploma, and servility as his guide, Popov preceded to instruct the youth in the “true principles of Leninism”. After the lectures were read, they were “hastily got ready for publication”. Why? “Because at that time, there was lacking [read: Stalinism was lacking] any sort [!] of adequate literature on the history of our party.” (Introduction to the fourth edition.)
Thus, from the very outset, Popov’s “lectures” served as a text-book in the Soviet schools. By 1929, eight monster editions were exhausted. But although the market improved, the requirements kept changing. Formulations “gave rise to misunderstandings”. From one edition to the next, Popov proceeded systematically to “render them more precise”. (Introduction to the eighth ed.)
To illustrate the “system” and the “authoritativeness” of Popov, we shall briefly compare the text of the ninth revised Russian edition – with the text of the sixteenth revised English edition. One should imagine that by 1929, after the 15th party congress, after the expulsion of Trotsky, and the final “annihilation of Trotskyism”, and after eight editions, Popov had arrived well-nigh to perfection in “rendering his formulations more precise”. By 1929, “Trotskyism”, as any authority on Stalinist history knows, had definitely been established as the “vanguard of counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie”. But alas, even in 1929, Popov was not informed of the counter-revolutionary requirements for 1932.
Ninth edition-1929-Popov was still unaware that the “party” (read: Stalinism) held an absolutely 305% Leninist position before, after, and during Lenin’s arrival from abroad in 1917.
In 1929, Popov thought it was 99–99¼% Leninist. He was so misinformed as to underscore the fact that after the overthrow of Czarism, “our organization was somewhat in a disrupted condition”. Worse yet, he goes on to underscore that even after the February revolution the party line was somewhat distorted. And he explains it, in part, by the return to the party of a “considerable number of old members” who returned to the party “with the old moods of 1906–1907” and whose “moods could not fail to reflect upon the line of our party”. (p. 212 Russian edition. Italics in the original.)
Still worse, even the line of the Pravda in 1917 did not at first
“fully coincide with those views which were advanced by comrades Lenin and Zinoviev and others abroad, and it [Pravda] deviated to the side of revolutionary defensism and the support of the Provisional Government”. (Id., our italics.)
Popov then proceeded to quote what Kamenev wrote on March 15, 1917, and to comment upon it as follows: “Such language differs very little from the usual language of the social-patriots at that time”. (p. 213, Russian ed.)
No mention is made of Stalin except to quote him in support of the above presentation. Not a word about his role, despite the fact that he, Stalin, was with Kamenev the editor of the Pravda in this period. Such was the historical “outline”, in 1929, in the ninth “authoritative” edition.
Ah, but what an improvement in the sixteenth!
Was it as difficult for our party to regain its positions as Popov said it was in 1929? Nonsense, student of Lenin and Stalin, nonsense! Turn to page 351, vol.I, and read for your edification, facts Popov forgot in 1929: “In spite of severe repressive measures, the Bolshevik party developed intense activity. On the eve of the revolution the Russian Bureau of the Central Committee was quartered in Petrograd and consisted Of Molotov, Shlyapnikov and Zalutsky.” (What, no Stalin?) Everywhere were carried on “widespread and fairly [!] systematic activities”.
True, things were not so very vigorous and firm in the provinces. But that was due to the influx of “new workers into the party organizations; these were revolutionary-minded, but still without adequate political training ...”
Were there any deviations from the party line? Nonsense: “The overwhelming majority of the party was opposed to rendering any sort of assistance to the Provisional Government.” And who led the fight? Stalin, of course. Against whom ? “Against some “elements ... even among the leaders, who inclined towards defensism ... This was particularly true of Kamenev ...”
And again there follows the Kamenev quotation of March 15 – but this time Popov has no comments to make. Instead he calls the attention of the students to an historical fact:
“Even before Lenin’s return the Central Committee and the Petrograd committee were obliged [!] to call Kamenev to account.” (p. 355, Vol. I)
Where? when? in what documents? Silence.
Moreover, Popov no longer keeps mum about Stalin, but has quotations in full showing how the party, with Stalin at the head, fought the deviators “even before Lenin’s return”. We suddenly learn in the sixteenth edition that immediately upon his return from exile, Stalin “outlined a course directed towards the creation of a government of the Soviets”.
A piece of news Popov was blissfully ignorant of in 1929. For, we repeat, he then quoted Stalin to prove how the best disciple of Lenin strove to correct “the then incorrect tactic of the party”. (p. 214, Russian ed.)
The English edition, naturally, contains neither the “incorrect” quotation from Stalin nor Popov’s “stupid” assertion that “Lenin’s arrival aided the party to rid itself of these erroneous views, speedily and with comparative ease”. (idem)
This scratches only the surface of the difference in treatment of this particular period in the two editions, not to mention the other editions. To do Popov justice, we would have to reprint his several editions in parallel columns. The reader has had a sufficient sample of the garbage Popov purveys, but let him bear in mind, even though his stomach may turn, that in this instance as well as throughout the whole book, Popov serves his Master with a colossal job of “rendering his formulations more precise”.
But we cannot leave unmentioned one of Popov’s most unskillful botchings. His “improved version” of the Brest-Litovsk episode in party history was vile enough to suit his taskmasters, in 1929. But even in that version, Popov admitted the following facts relating to the final vote in the Central Executive Committee on Lenin’s motion to accept the terms of the German imperialists:
“Voting for this motion were seven members of the C.E.C. (Lenin, Smilga, Stalin, Vverdlov, Sokolnikov, Trotsky and Zinoviev) ; six voted against (Uritsky, Joffe, Lomov, Bukharin, Krestinsky and Dzherzhinsky). The majority of one was obtained as a result of the fact that Trotsky who up to then sided with the opponents of peace voted for Lenin’s motion.” (p. 235, Russian ed.)
The Stalinist stooge had to admit, in a footnote, that it was Trotsky’s vote that carried Lenin’s motion. In 1929, the Stalinist falsifiers of history still proceeded “cautiously”.
In the sixteenth edition Popov positively becomes lyrical describing:
LENIN’S FIGHT AGAINST TROTSKY ... FOR THE CONCLUSION OF PEACE
And, of course, it was Stalin who made possible the signing of the Brest-Litovsk treaty: “... a number of the Central Committee members HEADED BY COMRADE STALIN resolutely supported this [Lenin’s] viewpoint.” (p. 11, Vol. II, English ed.) And, of course, Popov forgot to. mention it in 1929, or in any previous editions.
From the time the first edition appeared, it became obvious to Popov that his outline suffered from being overloaded with “second rate factual material, as well as several unessential facts concerning party history”. Needless to say, the last edition does not contain a single fact relating to any “positive” aspects of Trotsky’s revolutionary activity, which still survived in footnotes, and sneering comments of the ninth edition.
It is impossible to list the omissions, subtractions, additions, and multiplications. Suffice to mention that Bukharin in 1929 was still cautiously defended by Popov on “his” slogan: “Enrich yourself!” More remarkable still is Popov’s original defense of the Chinese policy.
It is no joke being a Stalinist historian! Take the case of comrade Lozovsky. During the October Revolution this rather “well known” comrade, using Popov’s language, disagreed very violently with the party line. Not only did he publish a letter in Novaya Zhizn (the same paper in which Zinoviev’s and Kamenev’s statement appeared) dissociating himself from the party line, but he left the party, and returned only in 1919.
For some unknown reason, Popov thought that this was an important and a safe piece of historical information, and he proceeded to give it, in 1929. (p. 254, Russian ed.) But, in the sixteenth edition, Lozovsky is conspicuous by his absence. Having subtracted Lozovsky, Popov added comrade Teodorovitch to the list of “conciliators”.
These mysterious appearances and disappearances turn the “outline” into a spiritualistic seance. Ghosts wander through the book – the maimed essence of Bolshevism wails from page to page, from edition to edition.
Every trace of Leninism is removed. Together with this ballast Popov threw out, first, all the programmatic documents he originally gave as a supplement, giving instead references at the end of each chapter. The sixteenth edition dispenses with these references, as well as others. The reader, if and when he is referred, finds only a volume given him, and a volume, thereto, of selected works. In return, however, Popov “tractates” more and more and more profusely “the opportunistic deviations from Bolshevism during the different periods of our party”. As one proceeds from one edition to the next, the improvements become more and more self-evident, more and more authoritative, and more and more systematic.
In any case, and this is incontrovertible, were Popov’s most apt pupil who conned the previous texts, to take his examination now, he would be promptly flunked, that is to say, reported by Popov himself as a counter-revolutionary renegade, vanguard of the imperialist bourgeoisie, the scum of reaction, etc., etc.
We close by sounding a warning to the students of the “works of Lenin and Stalin” to whom the International Publishers recommend this book: this is not the last authoritative “outline” – it still falls far short of the recent historical discoveries of Stalinism, and it will have to undergo further considerable “improvement”.
J.G. WRIGHT
 



Socializing Our Democracy
By Harry W. Laidler.
330+x pp. New York. Harper & Bros. $3.00.
It is polite, I imagine, to begin by noticing virtues. Of these, there are three that are considerable. In the first place, Socialising Our Democracy is a useful handbook for supplying material for lectures, popular essays, and conversation. Its analysis of contemporary United States capitalism is neither profound nor exhaustive. It does not pretend to compete with, for example, Lewis Corey’s The Decline of American Capitalism. It does, however, bring together a variety of facts and statistics which, apart from any interpretation, are revealing. These cover such matters as income distribution, ownership, public enterprise, cooperatives, etc. There is nothing surprising, but it is well to have these things made concrete and specific. They demonstrate once more, and again conclusively, how ready the potential economic organization of this country is for socialism.
Second, Laidler must be praised for having in a single volume posed so many of the essential problems. These include not merely the usual questions involved in the seizure of power, the transfer of ownership, the nature of the workers’ state. Laidler is especially interested in certain of the great issues that will confront the new society. He has chapters, for example, on Incentives and a Socialized Society, Guarantees of Security, A New Political Structure, The Family, etc. The chapter Making Industry Pay under Socialism, though confused as usual by the failure to make a distinction between the period of working class dictatorship and the actual socialist society, is valuable, particularly in its survey of methods of accounting and management used in the Soviet Union.
It is true that discussion of issues of this kind is often no more than idle day-dreaming, the sign of a failure to face the revolutionary tasks of the day. In Laidler’s case, this is to a large extent so. Nevertheless, they are real problems, and they will not be met successfully by the workers’ state unless some preparation has been made. The discussion of them has likewise an agitational value in suggesting the kinds of achievement that will be possible under a workers’ regime. Socialization of industry will not be gained by mere fiat of the revolutionary government, no matter how politically powerful it may be in the initial stages. And it will not continue to hold power if its own ineptness in technical and administrative matters causes the breakdown of industry during the first years. The baffling intricacies of money and bookkeeping will, unfortunately, remain to plague the workers’ state long after the counter-revolution has been thoroughly suppressed.
The third virtue worth mentioning is Laidler’s constant realization of the human and cultural problems involved in the revolution. He does well to include sections on education, art, recreation. We cannot be too often reminded that politics, too, is an undertaking of man.
So much for the virtues. They are, it will be noticed, the typical virtues of the enlightened social democrat. And they are amply, very amply, compensated by every one of the typical faults. Here is a socialist of some standing, a socialist with an accredited bourgeois Ph.D. to boot, writing with the experience of the war, the crisis, the NRA, the rise of Fascism, behind him. And what has he learned from these rich lessons of history? He has learned – and Laidler is a fair enough representative of official social democracy – precisely nothing. A review does not provide space enough for detailed analysis. I shall, however, list briefly a few of the more glaring indications:
1. On the question of war, the question now imminently confronting the working class of the world, Laidler has ... nothing whatever to say. Apparently war is not a serious problem for the revolutionary movement. The fight for socialism can be planned quite independently of war. If war comes, it will be, no doubt, an “exceptional event”, and we will then decide what to do about it. The omission is not accidental. The war of 1914-1918 was also an “exceptional event”, not allowed for in the progress toward socialism. And we know what social democracy did about it.
2. The Soviet Union is many times referred to in this book. In the discussions of the problems that will confront the new “cooperative” (the currently favorite socialist adjective) society, the experience of the Soviet Union is heavily drawn on. This is as it should be; and the Soviet Union should always be looked at by Marxists as the central laboratory of revolutionary experience. But not once does Laidler touch on a single fundamental issue involved in Soviet policy and practise. It is not that he presents incorrect views on these matters; he presents no views on them at all. Of course, this in itself is, in the long run, a view, and a fatal one.
3. In spite of occasional parentheses to the contrary, Laidler systematically confuses the distinction between “public ownership” under capitalism and socialized ownership under a workers’ state. This, too, is not accidental. By the confusion, the gradualist, reformist notion of the transition to a socialist society is reinforced. Socialist society is made to appear merely the quantitative extension of the “public ownership” features of capitalist society, instead of a qualitatively new form of society, in which public ownership as we know it as well as private ownership will be radically changed in kind.
4. I have already mentioned the failure to distinguish between the period of working class dictatorship and the socialist society. Since, however, Laidler is against “dictatorships” of all kinds, and in favor of “democracy” – without, of course, making any critical distinctions between kinds of dictatorship and kinds of democracy – this is hardly surprising.
5. This last matter is closely linked to Laidler’s treatment of the subject – so fragile in the hands of a social democrat – of the conquest of power. It is here that we see the fine flower of neo-socialist Centrism. After Germany, Austria and Spain, the old-fashioned simple reformism won’t quite do. It must be dressed up in new ambiguities and equivocations, new brave talk about what the socialist government would do if, once in power, the electorally defeated capitalists should take up a counter-revolutionary offensive (which, Laidler hastens to assure us, is most unlikely in this country, where the capitalists are intelligent and will see that they have no chance). Even the verbal possibility that some crisis (war, Fascism) might force the socialists to take power even though they did not hold an electoral majority, must now be “conceded”. But the real juice of the doctrine comes out in the final paragraph from Chapter V:
“Thus, while it is impossible to prophesy with certainty whether the change from capitalism to socialism will be a peaceful or a violent one, there are many forces at work which point to a genuine possibility of peaceful change in this country, and the revolutionary movement should strive with might and main to make this possibility an increasing probability as time goes on.” (My italics – JW)
What does this last phrase actually mean when translated into the language of politics? It means exactly this:
“... and the revolutionary movement should strive with might and main to prevent the workers from taking steps to defend and advance their rights, it must be sure to keep them from ever possessing the means for gaining power, it must carefully deceive them about the nature of their struggle, it must tie them up to hand them ‘peacefully’ over to Fascism; and if it does let them fight, as in Austria or Spain, it must be certain that they fight when it is too late, when their cause is already lost, and when the only possible result will be the bloody, useless sacrifice of its finest members.”
Socialising Our Democracy, in short should be made a compulsory text for all those, within the socialist parties or outside them, who are now busy spinning illusions about what may be expected from the author of this book and his political companions.
J.W.



War: No Profit, No Glory, No Need
By Norman Thomas
Frederick A. Stokes Co. New York. $1.50.
The new international war crisis is no longer a matter for prophecy and prediction. It is already here, inaugurated by the launching of the Italian campaign in Ethiopia. We have entered the period of the armed struggle of the imperialist powers for a re-division of the world. This does not, of course, mean that open world war is scheduled to begin immediately. Delay, hesitation, maneuvering are still, for the moment, possible. What it means is that the approach of the world war has now become the decisive and determining factor in international, and thus also in national, developments.
This is no less true within the working class than in the case of the bourgeoisie and their national states. Once again it is the war crisis that strips bare the pretenders and betrayers within the working class, that acts as a powerful solvent to separate the opportunists, the social patriots, the sectarians, from the revolutionists – for, more directly and obviously than in any other test, it is the revolutionists alone who can stand before the impact of the war crisis.
It is against this background, then, that we must judge any and every statement of position on the question of war. On the question of war every responsible person must be completely serious. No evasions, no half-truths can be accepted. The only answer to war is the full answer, with no sugar-coating.
In the light of these considerations, what are we to say about Norman Thomas’ new book on war, a book published only a week or two after the beginning of the Ethiopian campaign ? It must be remembered that this is a book of great significance for the labor movement in this country. Thomas is justifiably known as the public leader of the Socialist party, its most popular speaker, writer, and candidate. He is more particularly known as the official leader of the official Militants, the man to whom many of the leftward moving Socialist party members still look for leadership in the fight against the right wing and for the regeneration of the socialist movement. His answer to the most crucial problem facing the working class deserves the most careful study and analysis.
But, alas, to begin with we find that this new book is three-fourths mere journalism, mere loose writing about the horrors of the last war and the probable horrors of the next, doubtful history about the origins of war in human society and the character of early wars, side paragraphs of questionable biology, anthropology and psychology. Such journalistic treatment has, no doubt, a place, and sometimes a correct one, in the agitational side of the struggle against war. It does not always have the effect that is intended. Some years ago, Kenneth Burke pointed out how convincing portrayals of the horrors of war may easily be turned toward the ends of the war makers, since these made the sacrifices of the soldiers seem even greater acts of nobility. But the present time demands, not “popular” essays, but – the correct answers to the fundamental questions.
It is, therefore, the remaining quarter of Thomas’ book, the political sections, which concern us. These may be adequately judged by outlining Thomas’ five point program for “struggle against war” in this country:

“An immediate, solemn declaration of national policy by the President and Congress that the United States will not supply, or permit its citizens to supply, arms, munitions, or financial support to belligerents or prospective belligerents.”
“... the largest measure of disarmament that the public can be persuaded to accept.”
A cessation or mitigation of imperialist policies on the part of the U. S. government. (Thomas records with approval that the government has not been “so aggressively imperialist” in the thirties as in the twenties.)
Repeal of the Asiatic exclusion laws.
“International cooperation”, as against “isolation”.

Put clown in outline, in black on white, this might seem almost like a joke. What world, one is tempted to ask, is Thomas living in? To propose disarmament seriously in the stage of preparation for the new world war! To beg the most powerful imperialist power on earth to be a little less imperialistic and not antagonize other nations! To solve the Far Eastern conflicts by admitting a few Japanese to California! To cooperate internationally – with the war makers! To preserve peace by founding it on a public promise of the war government of U. S. finance-capital! Truly, a program for the Duponts and the directors of the Chase National Bank to smile over.
It is, of course, not an accident that Norman Thomas puts forward such a program. Thomas’ approach to social problems is always first and primarily ethical and psychological. Politics is for him a kind of by-product, and political statements in his works usually give the impression of being in parentheses. Consequently it is not surprising that his political position is a strange and precarious melange. All through this book on war we find the constant expression of political problems in their ethical and psychological form. We are told about war’s “madness”; “this ‘homicidal mania’ which men call war”; the “megalomania” of Mussolini which can be satisfied only by foreign conquest; the “nasty mess” resulting from the Rickett concession; the “dreadful” hazards of the secret war for oil: the failure of the League of Nations to show “real zeal in behalf of justice and peace”; the encouraging factor of “the sincerity with which the European masses have condemned Mussolini’s raid” ... But nowhere in this book do we find a sharp, clear analysis of what makes wars, and, in the light of what makes them, how they can be got rid of. There are, it is true, a few side remarks to the effect that the “capitalist nationalist system” breeds wars, and that we shall have to build a “cooperative society” in order to be secure in peace. But these remarks are introduced almost apologetically, as if Thomas were anxious to avoid offending anyone who might be enlisted in the “struggle for peace” so long as this didn’t upset the rest of his customary behavior.
Nowhere is the weakness clearer than in the last chapter, which is entitled, A Postscript on War and Revolution. Here Thomas takes the position which has now become pretty well standard among large sections of the leadership of world social democracy who can no longer keep their standing with the old type out and out gradualism. “Violent revolution” is a terrible thing – in all probability even more terrible than international war – but nevertheless there is a “possibility” that it may have to be undertaken as a last resort. The “sane revolutionist” will not “utterly renounce the use of violence”; “if new world war is begun there may be nothing for it but to try to turn it into the right sort of revolution in order to end the war” (will that be the aim of the right sort of revolution? To end the war? – Thomas states no other aim). But the events in Austria and Spain alone have proved with entire conclusiveness that this “sane revolutionary” attitude is not one degree better than pure and simple gradualism: to admit only the “possibility” of fighting, and then to drop the whole subject, is only to guarantee in advance that you will lose the fight when it starts.
Nevertheless, there are greater surprises in Thomas’ position, and of an opposite sort. In a footnote, written apparently while the book was in proof, he writes a paragraph on the Seventh Congress of the CI, which briefly and yet decisively analyzes the CI’s present position on war from close to a Marxist point of view. This single paragraph says more on the question of war than the entire remainder of the book. Readers should begin with this paragraph, and should then use it as a critical weapon to carry them steadily through what precedes it.
It is, of course, Thomas’ ethical and psychological approach, combined with his personal charm and speaking abilities, which wins him so devoted a following. But above all on the question of war ethics and psychology and personal sincerity are not enough. Thomas is “right” enough in his feelings; but he is wrong in politics. In politics he wants it both ways: he wants – occasionally and if “absolutely necessary” – a revolutionary struggle for workers’ power (which is the only struggle against war as it is the only means for attaining socialism), and he wants also peace – international peace and a peaceful education toward the “cooperative society”. He wants it both ways; but the trouble is that you can’t have it both ways. This the members of the Socialist party are perhaps beginning to learn. And within their own ranks they have good teachers. For the Old Guard thinks not ethically but politically. They know what they want, and they want it just one way – their way. When the left socialists understand this clearly, they will understand also the solution to their own problems. And they will see that, on the question of war as on every other, it is not Thomas’ answer – which is in reality an effort to avoid answering – but the only possible answer: the Marxist, the revolutionary answer.
J.W.



AT THE Seventh Congress of the Soviets, a writer, A.
Avdeyenko, delivered an extraordinary speech entitled Why I
Applauded Stalin. It was one of the highlights of the Congress. So
profound an impression did Avdeyenko’s speech produce that Molotov
himself paused in his summary to take note of it. Said Molotov,
“I do not intend to dwell upon the speeches of
individual comrades ... I shall refer only to speech of writer
Avdeyenko who ... brilliantly underscored the great significance of our
struggle for socialism, as well as the devotion to Soviet power, and
the love for our party and [!] for comrade Stalin which permeates the
toilers in their millioned masses.” (Applause)
The issue of Pravda (February 1, 1935)
that carries Molotov’s summary, also carries Avdeyenko’s photograph and
his remarkable speech. Exigencies of space and time forbid us to
reprint more than the most exalted passages.
Immediately upon taking the platform, Avdeyenko said:
“Centuries shall elapse and the communist generations
of the future will deem us the happiest of all mortals that have
inhabited this planet throughout the ages, because it is we who have
seen Stalin the leader-genius, Stalin the sage, the smiling, the
kindly, the supremely simple ...
“When I met Stalin, even at a distance, I throbbed
with his forcefulness, his magnetism and his greatness. I wanted to
sing, to shriek, to howl from happiness and exaltation.”
And so Avdeyenko sang, shrieked and howled. Said
Avdeyenko in conclusion:
“Our love, our devotion, our strength, our heart, our
heroism, our life – all these are thine, great Stalin! Here take them,
all this is thine, chief of the great fatherland. Dispose of thy sons,
capable of heroic feats in the air, under the earth, on the waters, and
in the stratosphere ...
“Men of all time and of all nations shall call by
thine name all that is beautiful, strong, wise, and pretty. Thine name
is and shall remain on every factory, every machine, every bit of land,
and in the hearts of every man ...
“When my beloved will bear me my child, the first word
I shall teach him will be – STALIN!” (Frenzied applause)
The ecstasy and the feeling are unmistakable. So
genuine, so deeply felt, so unlabored.
In Pravda of December 9, 1934 there is
unfortunately printed a speech by the self-same A. Avdeyenko. In
December, he spoke not in Moscow but in Sverdlovsk; not at the
Congress, but at a meeting devoted to the forthcoming elections to the
Soviets. He spoke on the subject of The Intellectual. The
same Avdeyenko – the same passion! We reprint here passages from both
speeches.




AT SVERDLOVSK (Before)
I am an intellectual, I write books, I
study, I am happy, I love a girl in a new way, I am expecting a baby, I
live in a mighty, famous, gigantic land, I do not worry about tomorrow,
I go to theatres, I elect my own .government myself – all thanks to
thee Soviet power!
Early in the morning I jump out of bed, wash under the
cold faucet, perform calisthenics, and run up and down my rooms and
sing and laugh from surcease of strength – all thanks to thee, Soviet
power ...
I can be a real writer. I will live in Socialism, all
men shall be my brothers, I will live in a world eternally radiant and
happy – all thanks to thee Soviet power!
I dream of creating something immortal, of flying to
the moon, of circumnavigating the earth, of seeing socialism in Europe
and in America. I am able to think so boldly because my creative
imagination is not degraded by anybody – all thanks to thee, Soviet
power ...
I am happy, I am bold, I am full of the joy of living,
I am audacious, strong, passionate, curious, I have fallen in love with
all that is beautiful, good and true. I resemble my comrades, and my
comrades resemble me – all thanks to thee, Soviet power.


   


IN MOSCOW (After)
I am not infected with any disease, I am
strong, I cherish in my bosom the very finest human feelings: love,
devotion, honesty, self-sacrifice, heroism, disinterestedness – all
thanks to thee, great educator Stalin!
I write books, I am a writer, I dream of creating a
work which will never be forgotten, I love a girl in a new way, I
procreate my kind, and it shall be a happy one – all thanks to thee,
great educator Stalin ...
I am happy, full of joy of living, I am unshakably
bold, I go to sleep with greatest sorrow, I wake up happy, I will live
to be 100 years old, my hair will turn white, but I will remain
eternally happy and radiant – all thanks to thee, great educator Stalin
...
I can fly to the moon, travel to the Arctic, invent a
new machine, for my creative energy is not trampled by anybody – all
thanks to thee, great educator Stalin ...
We are many. We are – engineers, writers,
aviators, journalists, lock-smiths, mounters, machinists, government
officers, managers of cities, explorers of the Arctic scholars – all
thanks to thee, Sage Educator ...




Etc.


Etc.


Etc.


Etc.


Etc.




Inspired to become lyrical ourselves, we can only
paraphrase a second-rate English poet, and a great wit:




So, Stalinists, observe, a flea
Has smaller fleas that to him pray;

And these have smaller still to cite ’em:
And so proceed ad infinitum.




N.B. A. Avdeyenko’s novel, I Love

(thanks to you, O Stalin!) is the latest Soviet novel off the press of
the International Publishers. The Daily Worker
proudly quotes a reviewer in the English Spectator who
insists that such a book “could hardly be dug out of the present-day
Western society”.
If Avdeyenko is half as expert at digging as he is at crawling – his
novel will be hard to beat.
J.G.W.



Literature and Dialectical Materialism
By John Strachey
54 pp. New York. Covici-Friede. $1.
One of the chief businesses of Oxford University, the training school for English gentlemen, is to teach its students to write well and talk well on subjects with which they have little acquaintance. So important is this task considered, that for their first two years every Oxford student, no matter what field he may be specializing in, is required to write one essay a week on a literary or philosophical theme; and every ambitious student is also a member of the Oxford Union, the famous debating society whose weekly meetings train the future members of the British Parliament. In Parliament itself, the same course is continued. There, too, members are expected to talk well on subjects about which they know little; and to write well in the leading weeklies.
John Strachey has gone through the full curriculum. His Oxford days were followed shortly by several years as a Labor member of Parliament. He split with the Labor Party along with the group headed by Sir Oswald Mosley. As Sir Oswald moved more openly into the Fascist current, Strachey broke to the Left, and steered toward the revolutionary movement. He marked his passage by the excellently readable The Coming Struggle for Power; but shortly after became diverted into the shoals of Stalinism, where, unfortunately, he still flounders. Even an Oxford manner cannot resist Stalinism: The Menace of Fascism, which followed The Coming Struggle for Power, is a bad book, badly thought and badly written.
I do not minimize the importance of being able to write well and speak well. Strachey can do both. He is perhaps the first contemporary English writer who has been able to make Marxism reasonably intelligible and reasonably persuasive to many individuals from the middle classes, particularly to intellectuals and professionals. This is not a small matter. The movement needs, and must have, supporting sections from the audience he addresses. Nevertheless, it must be pointed out that it is Strachey’s duty to think somewhat further, and to know more. When Marx spoke of members of the middle classes who attained a perspective of the historical process as a whole, he did not visualize this as leading them to make barnstorming tours for pacifist substitutes for a political party like the American League Against War and Fascism – Strachey’s current occupation.
Literature and Dialectical Materialism is not, as its title suggests, a systematic attempt to present a rounded Marxian approach to literature. It is the expansion of a lecture delivered last year to the New York John Reed Club, and is not so much an essay as a scries of partly connected reflections on certain literary and social problems. Strachey discusses briefly the incompatibility between Fascism and good literature; the general division between bourgeois and proletarian literature; the decadence of contemporary bourgeois literature; a poem of Archibald MacLeish’s as an example of bourgeois literature; a poem of Stephen Spender’s as an example of proletarian literature; and Hemingway as a literary Nihilist. In spite of its slightness, this book is not without value. It is easy reading, persuasive, and if it does not answer fundamental problems it at any rate poses a number of them.
The last word has by no means been said about Marxian literary criticism. Indeed, we have got but a short distance beyond the first page. The recognition of the dependence of the ideology and content of works of art upon social conditions, and the analysis of social conditions in Marxian terms is, however indispensable, hardly more than a starting point for criticism. There remain the myriad specific and concrete problems of the analysis of the works and schools and traditions and trends of literature and art; and these alone are what give meaning to tne abstract categories of our starting point. Strachey is aware of the difficulties, as he suggests when, after praising Granville Hicks highly, he says of him nevertheless that “He hardly seems to pay enough attention to the merits of writers as writers”. But this is hardly an answer. It is, after all, close to the crux of the issue.
J.W.



Veblen cannot be indiscriminately lumped with the common
run of American academicians. Compared to the academic fossils of his
time he was indeed one of the few outstanding original thinkers in
America.
He introduced the heresy of liberalism and objectivism into those
spheres where dogma had previously ruled unchallenged. Some forty years
ago John Bates Clark and William Graham Sumner were the infallible
popes who decreed that “rugged individualism” was the immutable law of
socio-economic development; they sanctioned private profit as a natural
right; capital, they said, was the reward of abstinence, and labor was
its next and dearest of kin enjoying the same freedom of contract and
having illimitable fields for advancement provided only it could
measure up to the superior standards of ruggedness.
This body of dogma was crowned by Clark’s bull that “each man is
paid an amount that equals the total product he personally creates”.
Into this massive optimism Veblen introduced a very discordant – and
somewhat pessimistic – note. He riddled the logical subtleties and the
fatuous apologetics of American “classical” economy; he ran roughshod
over its methods: he rejected the economics of the past as a taxonomic
science, reasoning from the premise that social institutions must be
approached dynamically and not statically; he declared the economics of
the past untenable in the face of evolutionary science. In a number of
books, particularly The Theory of Business Enterprise,
he laid low the natural right of private property by analyzing the
social “serviceability of business” and by attempting to elucidate the
inner logic and the actual development of capitalism.
He was a rebel in the liberal sense. He paid for it by becoming the
black sheep of the academic world. He was dismissed from one university
after another. He sealed his excommunication by publishing his analysis
of the influence of business upon The Higher Learning in
America, which book from the standpoint of critical analysis
marks the peak of liberal social thought in America.
Veblen unquestionably accepted his own approach as scientific. It is
equally incontestable that he attempted to analyze economic life as a
process. His attempts, however, did not pass beyond criticism. He
thought himself that his own generalizations were in part novel – and
in so far as American thought of his day was concerned this is correct.
For this reason he is reputed by many to be a modern iconoclast. By
imputation Veblen’s views have been interpreted as an attack upon
existing institutions. However, while there is much in Veblen that runs
counter to convention, essentially his work can serve only as a basis
for liberalism because his theoretic approach is founded on
pre-conceptions and not laws. Many of his views are novel only in so
far as they are far-fetched. Many of his seemingly iconoclastic
postulates are in reality conformist.
Veblen’s theoretic approach derives not from Marx whom he rejected
as unscientific but from Herbert Spencer. His “scientific” approach to
society is based on Spencer’s assertion that sociology is an
evolutionary science in the Darwinian sense. It is self-evident that to
assert that sociology is an evolutionary science is a different thing
from establishing it as such. Comte also made this assertion, but
Comte’s contribution to sociology bears the same relation to science as
astrology does to astronomy. Veblen not only failed to pass beyond the
stage of mere assertion but he was more than circumspect about his
avowed manner of approach. Why should an avowed disciple of Spencer and
a Darwinian discriminate against using the term “evolution”

prominently? Yet Veblen, who originally presented his most popular
book, The Theory of the Leisure Class, as an
“economic study in the evolution of institution”, omitted the term
“evolution” in subsequent editions, and changed the subtitle to read:
“an economic study of institutions”.
His attempt to establish sociology as a science sums up to the
extension of Darwinism to sociology in a manner which departs factually
but not methodologically from that of Spencer.
Herbert Spencer sought to synthesize Darwinian biology with
sociology. He saw no profound distinction between the laws that
governed biologic evolution, and those governing social evolution. He
viewed the social organism as corresponding at all points with the
physical organism. Accordingly, Spencer decreed that the same laws
operated in the evolution of man in society as in the evolution of the
psycho-physical man in nature. In society, just as in nature, the life
of the species is a struggle for existence; in both spheres the process
of selective adaptation takes place; and just as the biologically
fittest survive in nature, so the socially best survive in society
through natural selection.
Veblen likewise confounded the development of the organic species
with the development of society. He wrote that “the life of man in
society, just like the life of other species, is a struggle for
existence, and therefore it is a process of selective adaptation. The
evolution of social structure has been a process of natural selection
of institutions”.
Veblen differs from Spencer on two points: on the general definition
of Darwinism (evolution), and upon the terms in which social
institutions must be defined. Neither of these differences is so
decisive or scientific as might appear off-hand.
Spencer subscribed to the concept of progress both in natural and
social evolution; to him the modern system of free contract was both
beneficent and an ideal of nature. Veblen, however, discarded the
concept of progress as non-scientific, recognizing only development
through cumulative change, only movement without trend. He defined
evolution (Darwinism) as follows: “A scheme of thought, a scheme of
blindly cumulative causation in which there is no trend, no final term,
no consummation.” Spencer, on the other hand, did recognize trend in
evolution – the trend from a “relatively indefinite incoherent
homogeneity to a relatively definite coherent heterogeneity”.
To estimate the significance of this point of divergence between
Veblen and Spencer, one need only recall that Veblen’s viewpoint
translated into the language of economic theory coincides with that of
the revisionist, Bernstein, who said that, “Movement is everything, the
goal nothing.” Veblen was aware that the views of the revisionists were
akin to his own. He rejected Marx as unscientific. In his opinion, the
position of Bernstein, Conrad Schmidt, Tugan-Baranovski, Labriola,
Ferri, etc., was one “tending to bring them abreast of the standpoint
of modern science, essentially Darwinist”. His own definition of the
Darwinian standpoint did not, however, prevent Veblen from referring
illogically in his writings to progress, as for example: “the progress
which has been and is being made in human institutions and in human
character”. Veblen’s “iconoclasm” flows in part from this coincidence
between his views and those of the revisionists. But, it should be
added that there is no foundation for the opinion that Veblen’s thought
was deeply indebted to Marx, as is sometimes inferred. Whatever should
be debited against Veblen on this score must be credited entirely to
the revisionists.
As regards the second point of divergence, Veblen sidestepped
Spencer’s ingenious correlation of biology with sociology only to
construct an equally fanciful synthesis of later-day psychology
(instinct-habit) with sociology. Instead of defining social
institutions and biological terms, he defined them in terms of
psychology: “The institutions are, in substance, prevalent habits of
thought with respect to particular relations and functions of the
individual and of the community.” In the last analysis, therefore,
Veblen’s views only superficially diverge from Spencer’s. Without
keeping this definition in mind, one may easily read into Veblen, an
outright idealist, a standpoint – i.e., Marxism – altogether alien to
him. Thus, when Veblen asserts that “the cornerstone of the modern
industrial system is the institution of private property”, he does not
at all subscribe to the Marxian standpoint. To him the substance of
this cornerstone is psychological. It is made of mind-stuff because all
institutions, including private property are in substance only habits
of thought.
Again, one meets with the assertion that according to Veblen the
primary motive force in social change is the advance of industrial arts
and the growth of science. This is an error; to Veblen this advance is
derivative and not primary. His position on this point is in all
respects similar to Spencer’s who also wrote that “the development of
the arts of life, consequent upon the advance of science, which has
already in so many ways profoundly affected social organization
(instance the factory system) is likely hereafter to affect it as
profoundly or more profoundly”.
To Veblen the primary motive force is the human mind. “Social
evolution is a process of selective adaptation of temperament and
habits of thought under the stress of the circumstances of
associated life.” When Veblen says that the development of societies is
the development of institutions he implies that the development of
institutions is the development of human motives. He does not at all
imply what Marx maintained – that the development of the institutions
and therefore of society is governed by laws not only independent of
human will, consciousness and intelligence, but rather, on the contrary
determining that will, consciousness and intelligence. Veblen accepts
no such laws; he derives the development of institutions from human
nature. In his definition he merely repeats what Plato said, to wit,
that “the states are as the men are, they grow out of human
characters”; a dictum which was rehashed by Spencer to read: “the forms
of social organization are determined by men’s natures”.
But just how do the social forms evolve? And why? Spencer accounted
for social change in terms of improvement, or progress: “only as their
[men’s] nature improve can the forms of life become better”. Veblen
recognized only cumulative and correlative changes in nature, and in
human nature. But his attempt to explain the causes that underlie the
variation of human nature is as age-worn as the mummies of the
Pharaohs. Far from being scientific, it boils down to the animistic
formula of explaining a phenomenon in terms of the spirit. Human nature
varies because it is the nature to vary; or, more exactly, the
variability of human nature is due to the stability of human nature. In
Veblen’s own words, “this variation of human nature ... is a process of
selection between several relatively stable and persistent ethnic types
or ethnic elements”.
No doctrine in sociology is more reactionary than the doctrine which
seeks to interpret human history and culture in terms of the racial
equation. The logic of his theoretical standpoint, or rather the lack
of logic, forces Veblen to align himself with the assumers of the White
Man’s Burden, and of White Supremacy. To subscribe to the existence of
certain stable types of human nature is to believe in the existence of
specific and distinct races. How many races are there in the blood?
Virey said two; Jacquinot claimed three; Kant found four; Blumenbach –
five; Buff on – six; Hunter – seven; Aggassiz – eight; Pickering
insisted on – 11; Bory St. Vincent – 15; Desmoulins – 16; Morton – 22;
Crawfurd – 60; Burke – 63 ... and the latest ethnologist, the supreme
specialist in blood, Hitler, recognizes the One and Only Race, the rest
of mankind being sub-humans. Veblen does not compute the number of
races the world over; he is concerned only with those races that have
created the modern industrial community, that is, the Europeans,
including the Scandinavians. His authority on European races is Ripley.
Their number is odd, being three: the Nordic, the Alpine, and the
Mediterranean races; or, in terms of the shape of the skull, and the
color of the hair: the dolico-blonds, the brachy-brunettes, and the
dolico-brunettes.
This is the history of mankind according to Veblen. In our
industrial communities, man tends to breed true to one or another of
these three main ethnic types. In their turn, these three stable and
persistent types tend to breed in two main directions of variation:
variant A and B; variant A, or savage human nature, the peaceable or
ante-predatory man with industrial virtues; and variant B, or barbarian
human nature, the predatory man with acquisitive virtues.
In the beginning there was savage human nature, primitive and
peaceable; and the forms of social organization which grew up conformed
to this human nature, all deviations from the norm being repressed by
natural selection. During this primitive and peaceable epoch of
savagery, man tended to breed true to type A of human nature. Society
evolved, without trend, without consummation. Savagery passed from low
into high and then into higher. And when the high times passed, society
entered into the epoch of barbarism, the period of predation and
exploit, the epoch of the system of status. All this came to pass
because slowly but surely variant B of human nature began to
predominate, and the forms of social consciousness that grew up
conformed to this human nature, all deviations from the norm being
repressed by natural selection. Society kept on evolving, without
trend, with no final term. From low, barbarism shifted into high. And
the higher stage of barbarism was feudalism, both European and Asiatic!
Imperceptibly, the struggle for existence passed into the struggle to
keep up appearances. There ensued the quasi-peaceable stage. And
presently came the dawn of the peaceable epoch proper, which is the
epoch of the modern industrial community, popularly misunderstood as
the capitalist system. And throughout the epoch of barbarism, and the
quasi-peaceable epoch, and the era of peace, man still continued to
breed true to variant B of human nature.
To recapitulate. There are two types of human nature, though the
skulls may be dolico, or brachy, though the hair be blond or brunette.
The savage type A, in each case, is nearer to the generic human type,
being the reversional representative of the type that prevailed at the
earliest stage of associated life; and representing the ancestors of
modern man at the peaceable savage phase of human development which
preceded the predatory culture with its regime of status and so forth.
This atavistic type is characterized by honesty, diligence,
peacefulness, good will, absence of self-seeking, and suchlike prosy
humanitarian traits. The barbarian type B, in each case, is the
survival of a more recent modification of the main ethnic types and
their hybrids, as they were modified, mainly by selective adaptation
under the discipline of the predatory culture and the later emulative
cultures. An individual of this type is characterized chiefly by
ferocity and astuteness.
The history of society has been the history of the natural selection
of these two types of human nature. Two social systems have prevailed
in history: the system of status, and the system of contract. The type
of the system of status is the military organization, or also a
hierarchy, or a bureaucracy. The other type is the modern industrial
community. The author of this method of classification is Sir Henry
Maine. And Veblen borrowed it from Maine as did Spencer who also said
that “societies may be grouped as militant and industrial; of which one
type is organized on the principle of compulsory cooperation; the other
on the principle of voluntary cooperation”.
Both of these systems were hard on type A of human nature. So much
so that modern man still breeds true to variant B, particularly the
Nordics (the dolico-blonds) who are “possessed of a greater facility
to barbarism than the other ethnic elements with which that type is
associated in the Western culture”. All this is according to Veblen.
And according to Veblen, should the type persist, so would the
system, since
the social institutions must conform with human nature. Is mankind
perhaps sentenced forever to the ascendancy of human nature type B,
with its prime exemplar the Nordic, and the institutions suitable to
its temperament and habits of thought? Or, may society continue to
evolve? According to Veblen, the answer is No to the Nordic and Yes to
evolution. From this flows a goodly share of his repute as iconoclast.
But why is the persistent barbarian not dominant eternally? First,
because variations occur with some frequency at all times, the
proneness of men to revert to the past being proverbial. Secondly
because “this barbarian variant has not attained the highest degree of
homogeneity or stability. The period of barbarian culture, though of
great absolute duration, has been neither protracted enough nor
invariable enough to give an extreme fixity of type”. And finally,
because there is a New Deal in store. Hitherto conditions have been
ideal for the breeding of variant B; and by natural selection those
stray orphans of type A that did manage to sift through were repressed.
The trend, however, is becoming favorable for variant A to reassert
itself, become dominant and suppress variant B, with God’s help, or,
rather, by natural selection. In our time the reversions to type A “are
becoming noticeable because the conditions of modern life no longer act
consistently to consistently repress departures from the barbarian
normal”.
Veblen’s saga of the struggle that has been going on the historical
arena between the two types of human nature suffers because it must be
submitted to examination not as the work of a poet but that of a
scientist. Allowing Veblen his flights of fancy, his races, his human
variants, social systems and epochs, he must still explain what it is
that operates to suppress the Nordic ascendancy so prevalent in modern
life, and what made it possible for the barbarian variant to emerge on
so universal a scale.
According to Veblen himself, the latter type is neither stable nor
homogeneous. It is further removed from the generic human type. On the
other hand, its relative by blood, but its antagonist by nature, type
A, is not only closer, but it had persisted over a period much more
protracted. The social forms which had been generated to meet its own
requirements must have tended to repress all departures from the norm.
Yet the gifts of “good nature, equity and indiscriminate sympathy” (the
characteristic traits of savage nature) did come to be repressed by
natural selection in favor of the barbarian type with its “freedom from
scruple, from sympathy, honesty and regard for life”. How come?
Veblen’s answer is nothing if not inspired. To put it prosaically, at
the root of social evolution, as well as of all evil, is human nature
again, but this time in a skirt. Just as the original male, Adam, was
ejected from paradise because of Eve, so women are responsible for the
entire course of history to date. Or, to put it in the language of
poetry:




“Who was’t betrayed the Capitol? A woman!
“Who lost Mark Antony the world? A woman!
“Who was the cause of a long ten years’ war,
“And laid at last old Troy in ashes? Woman!
“Destructive, damnable, deceitful woman.”




Veblen’s version is equally masterful, due no doubt to
his Viking ancestry. Long, long ago, women, being feminine, applied
themselves to peaceable pursuits and industry; while men, by virtue of
their masculinity, resorted to predatory pursuits and exploit. Women
drudged, expending energy to create new things out of passive brute
material, while men converted to their own ends the creations of nature
and of mankind. “Virtually the whole range of industrial employment is
an outgrowth of what is classed as woman’s work in the primitive
community.” As a consequence, an early
discrimination arose between the employments of men and women: the men
tending naturally to look down upon feminine employments; the women
sullenly submitting as objects of contempt. From this original
invidious distinction between the occupations of men and women – whose
occupations coincide with the difference between the sexes – there
sprang up those institutions which tended to repress variant A in favor
of variant B. For obviously, under the regime of exploitation,
emulation and competition, the individual fared better in proportion as
he had less of the gifts of human nature A. In his appraisal of women,
Veblen agreed not only with the poets but with the patriarchs, among
them Spencer who held that “the slave class in a primitive society
consists of women”. Worse yet, women are directly responsible for the
institution of private property: “the earliest form of ownership is the
ownership of women by the able bodied men of the community.”

Destructive, damnable, deceitful woman!
Are women, perhaps, also responsible for the pending resurgence of
type A of human nature? Not quite. This time, it is entirely due to
evolution. With the dawn of modern enterprise social evolution enters a
stage unknown to natural evolution, or anyone else save Veblen. He
shares with no one the honor of formulating this discovery: “Under
modern conditions, the struggle for existence has in very appreciable
degree been transformed into a struggle to keep up appearances.” As a
consequence, the evolution of economic life “takes such a turn that the
interests of the community no longer coincide with the emulative
interests of the individual”. To millions in the world today who are
being forced to keep up the appearances of being alive while unemployed
this might sound like satire, but no satire was intended. The
formulation is a logical one, the logic pertaining to what Kant called
psychologic logic.
Veblen agreed not only with Spencer but with the revisionists that
under the modern regime “life is generally occupied in peaceful
intercourse with fellow citizens”. Peaceful intercourse and the
struggle for existence are mutually incompatible.
And this is how peace came to man. Originally type B had to
specialize in both force and fraud, mostly force. With the passage of
time, and the gradual improvement of industrial efficiency, predation
turned more and more in the direction of fraud. From being ferocious,
the barbarian by natural selection tended to become a specialist in
perfidy. Thus the era of rapine passed into the quasi-peaceable stages,
until finally the modern peaceful epoch of fraud was attained. So
peaceful that wars had become implausible. Spencer, too, was sure that
“the vast increase of manufacturing and commercial activity must lead
to a long peace”. All this is pure psychology.
Veblen brings the argument from psychology for every aspect of
social life. Thus, the ground for social unrest and the resulting
movement for socialism is “very largely jealousy – envy, if you
choose”. To Mill’s question, why has machinery not lightened the day’s
toil of any human being? – Veblen replies consistently enough,
“Because the increment of the output is turned to use
to meet the demand of conspicuous consumption, and this want is
indefinitely expansible.”
To sum up. In order to provide his Spencerian synthesis
of sociology with psychology, with logical consistency, Veblen had to
invent not only polar types of human nature but such human wants as the
indefinitely expansible human want of conspicuous consumption; not only
unheard-of instincts but also mystic broad principles or laws, such as
the Law of Conspicuous Waste. This law together with another Law of
Industrial Exemption affects “the cultural development both by guiding
men’s habits of thought and so controlling the growth of institutions
and by selectively conserving certain traits of human nature that
conduce to facility of life under the leisure class scheme, and so
controlling the affective temper of the community”.
These wants or principles or laws are Veblen’s embroideries upon
conventional economics; and they are as fraudulent (in a non-invidious
sense) as his Instinct of Workmanship. No such wants,
laws, and instincts are known to science as yet.
Veblen’s capacity for embroidering pre-conceptions is perhaps best
illustrated by his literary style. Let us take, for example, the
sentence just quoted above. Since the laws Veblen speaks of are nothing
but habits of thought: and since he defines institutions also as habits
of thought, this complex sentence merely sums up to the assertion that
habits of thought are engendered, controlled, selectively conserved and
so forth by habits of thought. Striving for precision, he achieves a
formality and massiveness so hypnotic as to put his readers into a
trance. Many critics have conceived of his writings as satiric, and
when they do not revile him, they speak of him as a ruthless analyst.
This opinion is largely unwarranted. Veblen was Spencer’s disciple even
in the sphere of style; what he strives for is not satire but
detachment, in the best scientific manner. He attempts to achieve in
his writings “an almost passionless consciousness”. For, as Spencer
held, “trustworthy interpretations of social arrangements imply an
almost passionless consciousness”. Without much difficulty one could
extract from Spencer’s writings as many “ruthless analyses” as may be
located in Veblen; and as like a close parallel could be drawn between
them. There is no more conscious satire in Veblen than in Spencer.
Veblen was no more of an iconoclast than Spencer.
It may be argued that Veblen was no supporter of the existing system
since he forecasted that the social engineers would build an industrial
structure “on a system different from either status or contract”. One
may just as well argue that neither was Spencer, since he also
forecasted that the future type of society would be a type differing as
much from the industrial as this does from the militant.
Those who insist on the contrary must begin by explaining Veblen’s
obvious lack of enthusiasm over the prospect of the future society, and
over the type of human nature that would be naturally selected under
the press of institutions:
“Not much is to be said for the beauty, moral
excellence, or general worthiness and reputability of such a prosy
human nature as these traits imply; and there is little ground of
enthusiasm for the manner of collective life that would result from the
prevalence of these traits in unmitigated dominance.”



How to Make a Revolution
By Raymond W. Postgate
The Vanguard Press. New York. 199 pp. $1.90.
From one point of view, this is a contemptible book. There is such an air of pretentious “realism”, of hard-boiled “facing the facts”, like a Boy Scout at his first sex talk. A skillful snobbery is woven into the style, which suggests that reader and author have a private understanding as thinking and sensible men, in contrast to the hare-brained fanatics who at present try to lead the revolutionary movement. We must be, author and reader, so thoroughly objective, weighing all the evidence, uninfluenced by wishful thinking. It is not, perhaps, surprising that all this objectivity leads us tumbling into the warm bosom of the British Labour party. A genuinely objective bosom indeed – not even making class distinctions.
Postgate attempts to be scientific. He states his question precisely on the first page:
“The object of this book is to answer, as scientifically as possible, the question: ‘How can a [social] change be brought about?’ Given that the readers of this book desire a thorough social change, and that they have some adequate idea of the measures that radical reformers should apply when once in power, there still remains the question: ‘How can power be taken over?’”
He attempts to answer the question by reviewing the classic answers that have been given to it in the past; by estimating their validity in the light both of historical examples of their application and of contemporary developments in the mechanism of power; and by considering in the struggle for power – the general the usefulness of certain specific practises strike, financial pressure, armed revolution.
Postgate examines the positions held with respect to his central question by Fascism, syndicalism, anarchism, Blanquism. He finds them all wanting both theoretically and by the test of history. To the general strike he grants a certain efficacy, particularly the first time it is tried within a country, and for negative purposes (“preventing a war or defending an attacked government”). Nevertheless, the general strike, so far as the more positive problem of achieving drastic social change goes, “requires other means – electoral or military – to bring it to final success, and it is very difficult to manoeuver”. The control over electoral machinery makes parliamentary hopes illusory. “Armed revolution”, moreover, “must be wholly rejected from our arsenal. Direct armed revolt is no longer practical”, even though a discreet use of violence on certain occasions may be effective within restricted limits.
Indeed, Postgate ends by rejecting all traditional methods for effecting social change as having either been proved useless by history or been made useless by the contemporary development of military technique and propaganda control. This conclusion, though hardly satisfactory, is at least more intelligible than the abrupt right about face of the last chapter. Here, in the most romantic denial of all that has preceded in the book, Postgate makes his jump into the Labour party. There, he states, revolutionists should gather to build a kind of party within a party, a band of “storm troopers of labour”, who, when the Labour party is voted into power (which he had previously ruled out as impossible), will see to it that the party carries through the social revolution.
This whole book is characterized by what might be called political superficiality. Postgate remains throughout on the plane of strategy and tactics, never digging down to the theoretic roots of the questions he attempts to analyze. This is strikingly evident in his treatment of Marxism and anarchism. Nowhere does he deal with the social and historical foundations of the positions he is discussing. He writes as if the positions existed in a vacuum, to be taken up and applied by anyone or any group that might feel like it. Even more obviously superficial is the chapter he devotes to The Communist Tactics, where he deals chiefly with the Communist Party of Great Britain, of which he was for several years a leading member. He never looks behind the tactics which he criticizes to the principles or historic causes from which these tactics flow.
Nevertheless, this theoretical failing is, in a sense, the strength of the book, and the reason why – in spite of its cheapness and superficiality – it should be read widely and thought about at length by serious revolutionists. This book does indeed deal! with strategy and tactics, above all with, the concrete plans for taking power in the present era, and it is precisely these concrete and practical problems that have been-most grossly and tragically neglected by Marxists. There has been for too long a time the naive belief that correct tactics wilt automatically now from correct theory; and consequently the fight of Marxists has been far too exclusively a fight for principle. Naturally this fight had to be made, and must continue. Moreover, it is true that without correct principle, tactics, in the long run, are sure to be wrong. But it is far from the case that correct tactics will automatically flow from principles correct in the abstract. Correct tactics require-intelligence, effort, activity. Indeed, a Marxian principle is distinguished by just the fact that it gets meaning and content only through correct revolutionary activity – that it cannot be even “correct” merely as principle, as abstraction.
It is time for a re-direction of energies.. We know the correct principles. We must apply them in stimulating and guiding a. movement. We must stop relying on a mystic faith in “the inevitability of communism” to make things turn out all right in the end, so long as we repeat the right phrases; and thereby excuse our practical stupidities. They will turn out all right in the end if Marxists make them.
The major problems of the day are practical problems. The great value of Postgate’s book is to help drive this lesson home. If he gives the wrong answers, he at least asks the right questions. And where are the right answers to be found? The unfortunate truth is precisely: Nowhere. The practical methods of all branches of the revolutionary movement, both with reference to their day by day activities and their plans up to and including the seizure of power and the workers’ rule, are a chaotic compound of Paris Commune, pre-war social democratic trade union and parliamentary habits, and the October revolution. Nowhere is the realization that capitalism in rapid decline and capitalism with modern military and publicity methods is a far different matter from pre-war capitalism. And being far different, so must be the revolutionary methods that oppose it.
J.W.



THESIS: “It is not true that the theory of the permanent revolution ... was advanced in 1905 by Rosa Luxemburg and Trotsky. As a matter of fact, this theory was advanced by Parvus and Trotsky.” – (Stalin in 1924; cf. Questions of Leninism, Russian ed., p. 185)
ANTITHESIS (7 years later): It is “Parvus and Rosa Luxemburg ... who are the authors of the Utopian and semi-Menshevist schema of the permanent revolution”. – (Stalin in 1931; cf. On Some Questions in the History of Bolshevism, a Letter to the Editors of Proletarskaya Revolutsia)
SYNTHESIS (7 months later): “Comrade Aristov,
“You have become befuddled, comrade Aristov.
“There is no contradiction at all between my article, The October Revolution and the Tactic of Russian Communists (1924) and my Letters to the Editors of Proletarskaya Revolutsia (1931). These two documents stress different aspects of the same question, and you took it for a ‘contradiction’. But there is no ‘contradiction’ here.
“In my article, The October Revolution, I speak about the fact that, in 1905, it was not Rosa Luxemburg but Parvus and Trotsky who advanced the theory of the ‘permanent’ revolution against Lenin. This is entirely in accord with historical facts ... As regards Rosa Luxemburg, she, you see, remained behind the scenes at that time, restraining herself from active struggle against Lenin on this subject, preferring, apparently, not to mix into the struggle as yet.
“In my polemic against Radek, in my article, The October Revolution and the Tactic of Russian Communists, I bore hard upon the question of Parvus, because Radek in speaking about 1905 and the ‘permanent’ revolution, deliberately kept quiet about Parvus. And he kept mum about Parvus, because Parvus, after 1905, became an odious figure, becoming a millionaire, and turning into a direct agent of the German imperialists; and Radek did not want to connect the theory of the ‘permanent’ revolution with the odious name of Parvus. He tried to sneak around history. So, I made a frontal attack and spoiled Radek’s manoeuver by reestablishing the historical truth, and giving Parvus his due.
“That is how matters stand regarding my article, The October Revolution and the Tactic of Russian Communists.
“As regards my Letters to the Editors of Proletarskaya Revolutsia, there I dealt with the other side of the question, to wit, with the fact that Rosa Luxemburg and Parvus were the authors of the theory of the ‘permanent’ revolution. Again, this is also entirely in accord with historical facts. Not Trotsky, but Rosa Luxemburg and Parvus were the authors of the theory of the ‘permanent’ revolution. Not Rosa Luxemburg, but Parvus and Trotsky advanced the theory of the ‘permanent’ revolution, in 1905, and actively struggled for it against Lenin. Subsequently, Rosa Luxemburg also began to struggle actively against the Leninist schema of revolution. But that was already after 1905.
“That is all.
[signed] “J. Stalin”
The above letter is dated January 25, 1932. It was published seven months later (cf. Bolshevik, No. 16, August 30, 1932).
What a synthesis! What a style! What a man!
To complete the picture, we need only add what comrade Trotsky once said:
“Stalin’s falsifications are conscious in so far as they are dictated at each given moment by entirely concrete and personal interests. At the same time, they are semiconscious in so far as his congenital ignorance places no impediment whatever in front of his theoretical propensities.”
John G. WRIGHT
 



Another Columbus on the Humanist Horizon
IN ITS leading article, Pravda (June 21, 1935) hails the dawn of “Soviet Humanism”. First came the great lover, Joseph Stalin, then came the dawn :
“The teachers of the ruthless class struggle – Marx, Engels, Lenin and Stalin – are all great lovers of humanity, the great humanists of the proletariat ... The dawn of the new Renaissance has already risen over mankind. It is being newly established in the Soviet land ... It engenders heroes and titans ... This, the wonderful dawn of a new humanity ... But it does not come by itself ... Cherishing the human being has become the most important, the primary task of socialist construction, and this new epoch of world history was discovered and underscored by comrade Stalin’s speeches on the need of lovingly cherishing the human being, on the value of new cadres – the supreme value of emancipated humanity ... With revolutionary intransigeance, with redoubled class vigilance, burning out all the weeds that are alien to his class, the Bolshevik is dutybound preciously and lovingly to nurse the budding and new human being, assuring to the latter the full measure of a free, happy and rational life ... The great Union of Soviet Socialist Republics raises high over the world the banner of humanism. ...” (Our Italics)
 
Humanizing the Foetus
The first “Bolshevik crusade under the banner of humanism,” with Stalin-Lorenzo the Magnificent at the head, was launched against abortion. In the self-same issue of Pravda, A Mother Speaks (in two columns). She is Taisya Platonovna Fomenko, age 46, with five children, all living. Her oldest daughter, age 21, married a physician ten years older. One year married, and already pregnant. Husband away on vacation. The daughter, in tears over her discovery: “I don’t want to! I don’t want it! ... I want to study ... I haven’t begun to live yet!” So the mother speaks, and the question is, what to do? It is up to the father. “Will he be willing to be the father to his own child?” But let the mother speak for herself:
“I do not dwell on this point at such length because I wish to arouse interest in my daughter. But because her case is very typical. That is just how we get so many abortions.
“Take my own case. I had four children. And all girls. And I am a rural teacher, earning very little. And my husband – not meaning to cast aspersions on the male sex – is not a helpmate but a burden. He doesn’t drink, he doesn’t smoke, nor is he unfaithful, but he is a loafer, and refuses to work.
“So there am I with four kids, when hopes for a fifth arrive. So my girl friends say to me, ‘What’s the idea,? You ought to be ashamed of multiplying the poor! And, do you think anything good will come from your children? We’ll raise the money for you, and you go and have an abortion. Don’t bring shame upon our profession.’
“So I took the money. And I walked on foot to the city, 17 versts away. I came to the Polyclinic. The physician there – a woman. She examined me, and gave me permission. Says she, ‘Well, four are alive. That’s enough.’ Seemed even to approve. Gave me a slip with instructions where to go. So I started walking around with the instructions. Ashamed was I to lift my eyes and look into people’s faces, as I walked around the different offices. When I was about to give birth – everybody was so polite to me. But now I was walking the road of shame. I walked and walked and then I spat on it. I came back home and gave the money back to my friends. And, if you please, I gave birth to a son. My only one! How sorry I would have been had I aborted him. Now he is 8 years old. Such a solid gentleman ...” etc. etc.
And in conclusion the mother insists that men are responsible: “... the root of abortion lies in the male.”
 
Humanism on the Threshold of “Class Society”
But even the Humanist Dawn is not all roses. It has its somber shades, if not clouds. From the back pages, and obscure corners of the Pravda, we learn:
“Rostov on the Don, June 10. On June 10 the school sessions in the rural schools came to a close. However, the teachers in many districts are unable to take their leave because they have failed to receive their wages and their vacation money. Arrears in pay to the teachers in the region amount to 665,000 roubles ...” (Pravda, June 11, 1935.)
“N. Tagil, May 27 (by telegraph). The workers of the central electric station at the Ural railroad car plant, division of the Zentrenergostroy Trust, have not received wages for two months. The arrears for April and the first half of May already amount to 500,000 roubles. Telegram sent to V.Z.S.P.S. received no answer. Ask your assistance.
“Partorg of Central Electric Station,
“Yakovlev” (Pravda, May 28, 1936)
“Leningrad, May 27. The Bureau of the Leningrad District Committee, CPSU (Bolshevik) passed a resolution on the question of the revolting facts recently uncovered in several enterprises relating to chiseling on the workers’ pay, and also violations of labor laws.
“Chiseling assumed particularly large scope in the knit goods factory, Krasnoye Znamya [Red Banner], the textile plant, M. Gorki and the glass factory, Bely Bychok. For the month of January [!] 1935, 300 cases of chiseling were revealed at the factory, Krasnoye Znamya, and at the Gorki plant – 50 cases. At the Bely Bychok plant overtime work is assigned without the permission of the Organs for the Protection of Labor, and it is paid for at the same rate as ordinary labor ...” (Pravda, May 28.)
If these facts seep into the pages of Pravda, what must be the actual state of affairs?
Anyway, the humanists of Pravda issue a stern warning that all cases of chiseling and holding back pay, to say nothing of increasing the length of the working day will be brought – to justice!!! The managers of the above-named factories received – a censure. Nothing could be more humanitarian, in the Stalinist sense, that is.
J.G.W.



Trotskyism: Counter-revolution in Disguise
By M.J. Olgin
160 pp. New York. Workers Library Publishers. 15c
To page for the physical destruction of Trotsky and the
“Trotskyists” – this obstacle, and danger to the power, policies, and
privileges of the venal bureaucracy – the falsifiers of history, now
turned social-patriots, are preparing to go one crime further: to frame
up Trotsky and his co-thinkers as assassins, as terrorists whose aim is
to murder Stalin. The GPU was involved in the assassination of Kirov
(see NY Times, Jan. 24, 1935). But this attempt to
link Trotsky with the terrorists through a provocateur failed. Is there
another, a bigger and better frame-up in preparation? There is.

 
I
S.V. Kossior, reporting to the Kiev party membership, on
June 13, 1938 stated:
“... it is absolutely clear to all of us that both
Zinoviev and Kamenev were not only the inspirers of those who shot at
comrade Kirov. They were the direct organizers of this vile
assassination of comrade Kirov. They acted in complete harmony with the
counter-revolutionist Trotsky. Recently, in his statements abroad
relating to the assassination of comrade Kirov, Trotsky openly
revealed his terrorist position, openly called for terror against the
Bolsheviks, against the leaders of our party. All distinction
between him and the White Guards has long since disappeared.” (Pravda,
June 22, 1935.)
And here is Olgin, in America:
“He [Trotsky] has a dream now. To see ... the leaders
of Bolshevism assassinated.” (p.22.)
The seventh, main, and final feature of
“Trotskyism” is: “... support of intervention and killing of Soviet
leaders.” (p.49.)
“From this to the decision of some inflamed follower
to kill the leaders of the revolution – is only one step.” (p.137.)
“... The extreme logical followers of Trotsky resort
to the revolver.” (p.65.)
“Do the Trotskyists knowingly create a psychological
atmosphere that would fire some madman to attempt the murder of
Stalin?” (p.149.)
There is no mistaking the sort of atmosphere Olgin is
trying to manufacture in his Trotskyism, the 160-page
book by him issued in carloads, at a ridiculously low price. Unlike
Kossior, Olgin can only insinuate about the “connection” of the
Trotskyists in the assassination of Kirov:
“Did the Trotskyists of America maintain a direct
connection with the ‘Leningrad Center’ out of which came the
assassination of Kirov, or were they only appraised [sic!] of
its existence?” (p.136.)
But, like Kossior, he, too, states openly what his job
is:
“Today one exposes Trotsky as a counter-revolutionary
renegade who inspires [in Moscow, they say: organises – J.G.W.]
the murder of revolutionary leaders.” (p.144.)
Here we have the literary-provocateur at work.
And Olgin’s qualifications? Suffice to mention here that Oigin is no
novice at “exposure”, nor at getting the proper emotions across the
footlights, and of presenting a “character” in his proper relation to
the “plot”. He is the author of at least one produced play, and even a
hack’s knowledge of stage-effects comes in handily in plying the art of
Stalinist provocation.
Some forty years of Trotsky’s life have been spent under the banner
of revolutionary Marxism. It is an impossible feat to palm off a
Marxist for the advocate of individualistic terrorism. This
contradiction must be resolved. Olgin must therefore “build up” a
suitable character, for he is not in Alice’s Wonderland where one may
“skip forty years”. Hence arises the need for a “brief” 160 pages.
Olgin has to explain away how Trotsky became a revolutionary figure.
Sheer coincidence. A petty bourgeois, with talents as a talker and
scribe, collided with the revolution, and was swept along.
“When the revolutionary labor movement in Russia was
young, a man with a sharp pen and an oratorial talent such as Trotsky
could easily become noted.” (p.9).
The Russian revolution and all the Olgins were then
young and inexperienced. Ah, credulous youth! But the Russian
revolution grew a little older. How to explain away experienced age?
Olgin crawls out of his skin, producing quotations from old
controversies, distorting history, and undertaking psychologic
excursions into the petty bourgeoisie to prove that Lenin never
“considered Trotsky a Bolshevik”; that Trotsky was an “alien body
within the organism of the Bolshevik party, even when he was a member
of its Political Bureau” (p.15); that Trotsky only assumed the name
“Bolshevik”, but remained a petty bourgeois, (once a petty bourgeois
always a petty bourgeois) and therefore, logically, and artistically, a
consistent character for a White Guard assassin.
In 1907 Lenin said,
“A few words about Trotsky. There is no need here for
me to dwell on our differences with him. Suffice to mention that
Trotsky in his booklet, In Defense of the Party has
publicly expressed his agreement with Kautsky, who wrote about the
economic community of interests between the proletariat and the
peasantry in the present revolution in Russia ... These facts
suffice so far as I am concerned to recognise the closeness of Trotsky
to our views.” (Minutes of the London Congress of the SDLPR,
Paris 1909, p.329. Our italics.)
On November 14, 1917, at the session of the Petersburg
Committee of the SDLPR, Lenin said,
“I cannot even speak about this seriously [agreement
with the Mensheviks and the SR’s]. Trotsky has long ago said that unity
is impossible. Trotsky has understood this, and since then there hasn’t
been a better Bolshevik than he.” (Bulletin
of the Russian Opposition, No.7, 1929, pp.33f.)
But what are photostats or Lenin ? Or any number of
facts and documents to the contrary? “Lenin did not consider Trotsky a
Bolshevik” – (signed) Olgin (p.10).
And the provocateur must next rewrite the history of the October
revolution to fit his “character”. Who led the October insurrection?

“Wasn’t he [Trotsky] the leader of the revolution in 1917?”
In Vol.XIV of Lenin’s works, published in 1921, the following note
is to be found on page 482:
“Following the July days he [Trotsky] was arrested by
the Kerensky government, and indicted for ‘leading the insurrection’.
After the majority of the Petersburg Soviet passed into the hands of
the Bolsheviks, Trotsky was elected its president and in that
position organized and led the insurrection of October 25.” (Our
italics.)
On November 6, 1918, Stalin himself admitted as much:
“All the work of practical organization of the
insurrection was conducted under the immediate leadership of the
president of the Petrograd Soviet, comrade Trotsky. (Pravda,
No.214. The Role of the Most Eminent Leaders of the Party.)
So what? “He who knows the ways of the Bolshevik party
will easily understand why Trotsky was not among the leaders appointed
by the Central Committee to direct the uprising” – (signed) Olgin
(p.12).
Next, the civil war. “Wasn’t he at the head of the Red Army between
1918 and 1921?”
Twist and twirl as he will, the Stalinist forger has to explain
away, not a single episode this time, but the entire crucial period of
the civil war. Observe, how the Stalinist squirms:
“Time passed. Trotsky worked with the Bolsheviks ...
But he was a stranger in the Bolshevik party. The civil war came and
[!] Trotsky was given a high post. [Evidently, another coincidence – J.G.W.]
He was, so to speak, propagandist-in-chief of the Red Army.”

(p.13. Our italics.)
And Olgin describes how Trotsky “played General” during
the civil war:
“Trotsky travelled up and down the front ... went
into the trenches to talk to the Red Army men; he made great public
orations – but he never led the civil war.” (p.13.)
It was just a delusion on Trotsky’s part. Olgin, the
military expert, has to admit that Trotsky was the “Military
Commissar”, just as he has had to admit Trotsky’s revolutionary career.
The facts are too well known. So they must be explained away. And we
hear again the now familiar melody. Just a coincidence! The civil war
was young, incredulously inexperienced, and an adult man with a sharp
pen – “issuing crisp orders that can be quoted as examples of military
style” (p.13) – and an oratorical talent such as Trotsky’s, could
easily become – not “noted” this time but – the Commissar of War. Just
as Trotsky played at being a revolutionist in 1905, so he was now
deluded
“into believing that he was the whole moving spirit
of that tremendous historic combat ... The actual facts are just the
reverse. The facts are that Stalin and Voroshilov
[what? no Frunze?] were the great fighters on the various battle fronts
– leaders with clear revolutionary vision and strategists of the first
order” (p.13).
Let us allow for the moment that Stalin-Voroshilov-Olgin
are correct. Let us allow that Trotsky
“knew nothing about the organization of the army, he
had wrong ideas about revolutionary strategy ... As a matter of fact,
his ideas about the strategy of the civil war were so wrong that, had
they been carried, the enemies would have triumphed ... etc. etc.”
(p.13).
We want to know: why did the party tolerate such an
ignoramus, and the whole Revolutionary War Council? Why wasn’t Trotsky
removed from his post during the years of civil war? Why was neither
Stalin nor Voroshilov – both these “strategists of the first order” –
appointed as the leaders, but why were they instead removed on more
than one occasion from difficult sectors? Why did Lenin send telegram
after telegram [1] to Trotsky
insisting on his going to the most critical sectors?
Olgin has had to explain away too much. His forged version of the
civil war compromises the party, vilifies the CEC and Lenin. For, were
his lies and monstrous exaggerations true, it could only imply that the
CEC led by Lenin, was guilty of the gravest, and absolutely inexcusable
crime before the revolution: supporting, as they are charged, an
ignoramus and bungler as the head of the Red Army. The leader of the
victorious Red Army was removed by the Stalinists after the
civil war from his post.

 
II
Having provided his “brief” with the required White
Guard Villain, Olgin must also supply the “Red Hero”. That is to say,
he must explain away the decade of crimes, defeats, and betrayals under
the leadership of Stalin.
The “world-charlatan”, the petty bourgeois adventurer in the
revolutionary movement, turned into a White Guard, finds (in Olgin’s
fertile imagination) his nemesis in Stalin, the Heroic, “the world
leader whose every advice to every Party of the
Comintern on every problem is [was and will be – J.G.W.,

J.C.] correct, clear, balanced, and points the way to new,
more decisive class battles” (p.149).
This hero in the Kremlin, who like Jehova has a promised land to his
credit – the Land of Socialism in One Country – is likewise responsible
for the ripe fruits of the “bloc of four classes in China”, the
Anglo-Russian Committee, the theory of social-Fascism, the victory of
Hitler in Germany, etc. etc. ... down to the ripest fruit of all, the
Franco-Soviet pact. And the latter-day Moses of this latter-day Jehovah
has a lot more explaining to do than was necessary in the Bible to
establish Jehovah’s infallibility.
Naturally enough, Moissaye J. Olgin prefers to do most of his
explaining in China, which is however not quite so far removed as
Heaven. The glamor and “mystery” of the Orient, as we know, covers much
filth and squalor, but not even China will screen a Stalin.
In China, if you please, there are Soviets “Led by the CP of China,
which early in 1935 counted over 400,000 members” (p.86); there is the
Red Army, “the wonder of the world ... in the neighborhood of one
million men” (p.86); and “the Red Flag with the hammer and sickle is
waving over a territory embracing a population of some ninety million –
about one-fifth of the total population of China” (p.86). Then, why
didn’t the one-sixth of the world which is communist at least recognize
the Chinese Soviets, in one-fifth of China? Why not a Soviet
China-Soviet Union pact against the threat of Fascism and war? Why
doesn’t Litvinov demand at least that this great ally be accepted into
the League of Nations?
Because Olgin is covering up the betrayal of the Chinese revolution
in 1925-1927, by the “Chinese Soviets”, peasant bands and peasant
armies, the remaining echoes and repercussions of the 1925-1927
revolution who are still able to maintain themselves due to the
peculiar conditions in China, with its vast vestiges of feudal economy,
the resulting economic isolation of provinces in the interior, the
absence of inter-province railroads and other means of communication,
etc.
Trotsky, Olgin yowls, “assumed a Menshevik position as regards the
very nature of the Chinese revolution”. The essence of Menshevism is
class collaboration, support of the “liberal bourgeoisie”. The
Mensheviks in Russia not only frowned upon the peasant seizure of land,
but they supported punitive expeditions against the insurgent peasants.
They discouraged as provocation and adventurism strikes of workers
during the revolution because all this would break the united front
with the bourgeoisie. They rejected the theory and practise of the
proletariat wielding the hegemony in the revolution: that democratic
tasks would and could be only the results of the proletarian
revolution; that only the proletarian dictatorship could and would lead
to the emancipation of the peasantry and the oppressed peoples.
What was the Stalinist policy in China? Stalin subordinated the CP
to the Kuo Min Tang in the name of the “bloc of four classes” (the
bourgeoisie, the urban petty bourgeoisie, the peasantry, and the
proletariat). After Chiang Kai-Shek’s betrayal, the CP was subordinated
to the “bloc of three classes” – only three “faithful allies remained”.
So the communists entered the Wuhan government and assumed personal and
direct responsibility for the punitive expeditions against the
insurgent peasantry!
There is no hiding the betrayal. It seeps out even in Olgin’s own
version. According to him, Chiang Kai-Shek “betrayed” in March 1927.
“When the imperialists began to bombard Nanking in
March 1927, Chiang Kai-Shek joined hands with them against the
revolution.” (p.103.)
But Olgin does not utter a peep about what the communist
party did after this betrayal was as obvious as is Olgin’s venality.
One month later, an April 13, 1927, the workers in Shanghai, under the
Stalinist leadership were compelled to hand over the city to “their
revolutionary” General, Chiang Kai-Shek, to be drowned in blood by
“their leader”.
As a matter of fact the first open act of betrayal on the part of
Chiang was not in March 1927, but one year prior to it, on
March 20, 1926, the occasion of his first overturn in Canton. For
years, this fact was kept from the international working class, and
Olgin remains true to tradition. There is no other way to justify
adherence to the Kuo Min Tang, the party of the butcher Chiang. How
else but by fraud can he justify Stalin’s “clear, correct and balanced
slogan”: “We shall never drop the banner of the Kuo Min Tang.” And they
didn’t! Chiang cut the throats of Chinese workers, drowned the
revolution in blood, and soaked the banner of Kuo Min Tang into a “red”
banner.
What did the Stalinists order the Chinese CP to do after March 20,
1926? What was the reaction of the masses? We give the floor to the
co-reporter on the Chinese question at the Sixth Congress of the
Comintern in 1928. The speaker is Strakhov:
“Even after March 20, we did our utmost to get along
with the March 20 regime so as to keep the united front with the
bourgeoisie, with Chiang Kai-Shek, with the nationalists. As far as the
masses were concerned they could not be reconciled to the March 20
regime.” (Inprecorr, October 4, 1928.)
The Stalinists, like the Mensheviks, refused to break
the united front with the bourgeoisie, and they were “taken by
surprise” in March 1927.
After they finally did “break” with Chiang Kai-Shek, the Stalinists
sought to maintain at all costs their “faithful” alliance with the
petty bourgeoisie. Again, Strakhov, the co-reporter on the Chinese
revolution:
“Although we were then already fighting against
Chiang Kai-Shek and the national bourgeoisie, we had not yet realized
the inevitability of a disruption of the united front with the petty
bourgeoisie for the sake of which we obstructed the development of the
mass struggle. (Ibid., p.1251.)
In the Wuhan bloc, in its alliance with petty bourgeois
generals and politicians, Stalinism discouraged peasant rebellions and
seizures of land. The Stalinist ministers in the coalition Wuhan
government violently suppressed peasant uprisings, “obstructing the
development of the mass struggle” as part of their Menshevist delusions.
Nauseating as Olgin’s picture of “Soviet China” is, he surpasses
himself in painting the Canton Soviet of December 1927. “The first
Soviet was organized in Canton after the armed rising of
December 11, 1927.” (p.106. Our italics). Soviets organized after the
rising! But doesn’t the Soviet, the highest organ of the united front,
also function as the organ of insurrection? Olgin denies the

“Trotskyist slander” that the Soviet was “created in a hurry” (Trotsky).
But Strakhov himself admitted that “there were very few people at
the mass meeting in Canton”. This meeting elected the delegates to the
Soviet. The revolutionary wave had already waned. To Trotsky’s charge
that the Canton uprising was an “adventuristic putsch”, Olgin replies
by screaming that it “was one of the most heroic uprisings of the
workers and peasants ... Over 7,000 fighters were shot in Canton alone
after the crushing of the uprising.” (p.107.)
The blood of heroic workers and peasants has served more than once
before as a cover for crime and treachery.
After one-sixth of the book devoted to the falsification of Chinese
history – two pages on the “third period”!
“We must confess, we never found in Trotskyite
writings anything resembling an explanation of why they disagreed with
the ‘third period’ analysis. They just scoffed.” (p.112.)
France, imperialist France, some seven years ago was
placed first on the order of revolution. Then, France was in
a pre-revolutionary situation; in 1935 – there is no “revolutionary”
situation in France, the military ally of Stalinism.
But the “third period” of the mistakes of the Stalintern was only
meant as a cover for the defeat in China and the betrayal in the
Anglo-Russian Committee. So it is best passed over in silence or with a
squeal – by all the Olgins.
And next – 12 pages on Germany and ... the “question of
social-Fascism”. After their “united fronts” with the Chiangs and the
Purcells, the Stalinists decided to play safe – no more united fronts
with anybody! Only the united front from BELOW!
In talking about Germany, Olgin prefers to speak – about Austria –
for the purposes of reducing the theory of “social-Fascism” and its
fatal consequences into a mere verbalism.
“In the very same way as Lenin, after the betrayal of
the proletariat by social democracy at the beginning of the war called
the social democratic leaders social patriots and social
chauvinists, so the Communist International called its leaders social-Fascists
– in the sense of paving the way for Fascism.” (P. 114.)
Lenin did it. [2]
Stalin did it. That is all.
And with this piece of sophistry and hypocrisy Olgin thinks to dupe
workers, who have not experienced themselves the actual essence of the
theory of social Fascism – not in the sense of “paving the way for
Fascism”, but as the very instrument of fascism.
In 1929 Pieck, one of the leaders of the CP of Germany, declared
that the social democracy “is growing more and more ripe to play the
chief part should a Fascist form of government be established” (Labour
Monthly, June 1929).
At the Tenth Plenum of the ECCI, Bela Kun (the present head of the
CI) stated:
“... the evolution of the social democracy towards
social-Fascism has not yet sufficiently advanced to enable us to
determine whether social-Fascism constitutes a special and final form
of Fascization in a number of countries, or if it constitutes a step
towards the complete development of Fascism also in countries like
Germany, Poland, Rumania, etc., which are on the road towards
Fascization.”
That was the only thing in question! Whether
social-Fascism is a final form of Fascism or a step towards complete
Fascism! And Bela Kun proceeds to attack the Right wingers:
“The Italian development is no argument against the
possibility for social democracy to evolve into pure Fascism
... If there is a sham fight between the social democracy and these
open Fascist organizations it is by no means a fight between two
principles but rather a clash between two methods of Fascization
... I believe, that in the present stage of the development of
social-Fascism we have to be prepared rather for armed clashes
with Fascism and its social-Fascist organisations, more than ever
before ... we should do our utmost to combat the social democracy and
in the first place, the Left wing of the social democracy”. (Inprecorr,
August 21, 1929, pp.872f.) Comment is unnecessary.
Trotsky and the Bolshevik-Leninists repeated time and
again that the social democracy “paved the way for Fascism” and they
attacked the theory that the social democracy is compatible with a
Fascist government, or that in advanced countries the social-Fascist
dictatorship would be the final form of Fascism. Trotsky insisted that
the social democracy would be crushed by Fascism. Now Olgin changes the
story. The Stalinists labelled Trotsky a “counter-revolutionist” for
proposing a united front of struggle against Fascism. Now, Olgin,
quotes extensively from Austria to prove that the Stalinists
did want a united front, but that it was impossible to make it. Why?
Because “prior to the advent of Hitler the social democracy did not
believe this [i.e., that Fascism would crush it. – J.G.W.]”

(p.119). Proof: Otto Bauer in Austria.
Did the Stalinists understand this before the events smashed the
skulls of the German workers? The theory of social-Fascism is the
answer! The united front from below is the answer! Even today the
Comintern still holds that the beaten and crushed German social
democracy remains “the main support” of Fascism.
Olgin himself has to admit that between 1929-1932, the CP did not
propose the united front to the SP – it did engage in the Red
Referendum. He tries to cover it up by underscoring that
“in 1929-1932 it repeatedly proposed joint
action against Fascism? The real position of the Stalinists was,
however, clearly enough stated at that time: ‘There is and can be no
united front with any group of social democratic leaders. The
anti-Fascist united front can and will be brought about to the
exclusion and against the groups of social democratic leaders’ – (Willi
Münzenberg, Rote[r] Aufbau, December 11, 1931.)”
From bureaucratic ultimatism and exaggeration of their
strength prior to Hitler’s seizure of power, to shabby sophistry in
apology for the betrayal after the victory of Fascism ... down to
social patriotism today – such is the itinerary of all the Staininists,
all the Olgins.
Where are the Stalinists leading the Soviet Union? In his “exposure”
of Trotskyism, Olgin tries to hide behind the achievements of the
workers in the Soviet Union, and argues, if you please, that Trotsky
denies “the possibility of a victorious proletarian revolution in one
country” (p.28). Trotsky, who with Lenin lead the October revolution is
“proved” to have lead it by mistake; he never believed in it anyway.
But today one no longer argues the subtleties of the theory of
socialism in one country, or explains the permanent revolution. The
Stalinists have promised the workers socialism in the Soviet Union, if
only they shut-up, endure and toil – for 10 years.
Long, long ago, the Stalinists proclaimed their “entry into the
period of Socialism” (see, for example, Inprecorr,
March 21, 1931). More, in October 1932, Manuilsky, the then leader of
the CI told the working class of the world:
“Do not forget that we shall enter classless society
only with the completion of the second Five-Year Plan.” (Report
to the Twelfth Plenum of the ECCI)
The workers in the Soviet Union have certainly not
forgotten. Today, on the eve of the completion of the second Five-Year
Plan, the Stalinists have to prepare to account for the frightful
discrepancy between realty and their theory. They are preparing to
settle the accounts by more repression, and more pogroms, and greater
and better betrayals.
Today, the question is put squarely: Are we the willing slaves of
“our own” imperialism or the implacable foes of imperialism and its
ally Stalinism? Upon the answer to this question depends the fate of
the workers’ state in the Soviet Union and the fate of the world
revolution. Their “clear and balanced” social patriotic betrayal will
not be masked by the literary and actual pogroms in preparation by
Stalin, and all his Olgins.
 



Jan Valtin’s autobiographical narrative, Out of the Night, belongs to the writings of a lost generation of European revolutionists. The leading characters that pass through the pages of his book are semi-fictionalized, semi-factual thumb-nail sketches of men and women who – in the interval between World War I and World War II – began as revolutionists. Confronted by history with the task of leading society toward new beginnings and a new life, they tried to assume the responsibilities of participating in and guiding the revolutionary struggle of the working class against capitalism. When that struggle was led by the parties of the Second and Third Internationals to catastrophic defeats, Valtin and his friends failed to carry on. Originally, they had gravitated toward communism (Bolshevism) but instead of Bolsheviks they became demoralized agents and dupes of the GPU (Stalinism). Neither Valtin nor any of the chief characters in thisbook proved capable of rising to the level of the historic tasks.
Each defeat left in its wake a quota of deserters. Some deserted to Fascism; others, Valtin among them, to the camp of bourgeois democracy. As against the relatively few who died physical deaths, a great many found themselves plunged into a darkness worse than death, drained of all capacity to struggle, robbed of all will to victory, sustained by nothing except the biological urge to survive. To call the roll of Valtin’s characters is to run the gamut of human bankruptcy and degradation. This is the picture he presents of his generation. Only philistines who expect to engage in great struggles without incurring any defeats would seek to explain the terrible fate of this lost generation solely on the basis of the defeats. To be sure, all defeats take their toll. But unprecedented as were the defeats of the last quarter of a century, they far from explain the tragedy of Valtin’s generation.
 
They Separated Practice from Theory
The tragedy of Valtin – who in this book rises to the stature of a social symbol – is the tragedy of the activist who never bothers his head about theory.
Drawn towards Bolshevism by his emotions, he failed to develop beyond this initial and elementary stage of revolutionary activity. Emotions may suffice for art, but never for revolution. He engaged in political struggles and yet it never once occurred to him that he owed himself a political accounting. He believed that only “counter-revolutionists,” only Trotskyists bother with such things. He idealized the Stalinist bureaucracy. He identified Stalinism with Leninism, the defense of the Stalinist bureaucracy with the defense of the Soviet Union.
The strategy and tactics of the class struggle, the theory and practice of the class doctrine – Marxism – its decisive importance in his own work and in the destinies of his class – all this remained for Valtin, as for thousands of activists like himself, a closed book sealed with the seven seals of the GPU.
He had the emotional urge to become a Bolshevik but he never became one because he never learned the cardinal lesson of Bolshevism, tested in the entire experience of modern history. “Marxist cadres capable of leading the proletarian revolution,” wrote Trotsky in the very heat of the struggle against Hitler in 1932, “are trained only by the continual and successive working out of problems and disputes.” Bolshevism developed under Lenin only in constant and irreconcilable struggle against the ideologies and programs of the Social Revolutionaries and the Mensheviks in whose ranks there were many sincere, devoted but misled revolutionists. Lenin and Trotsky never tired of warning and teaching the activists that loyalty to principles is the first loyalty of a Bolshevik. Only those who can assimilate into the very marrow of their bones the primacy of the ideological struggle can ever hope to emulate the example of the Russian Bolsheviks. Valtin never learned this lesson, that is why he remained for so long only a cog in the most monstrous apparatus of repression in history, Stalin’s GPU and then became, not a revolutionist but a vulgar bourgeois democrat.

Valtin joined the German Communist party in 1923, became integrated in the apparatus of the GPU in 1926 and served the Kremlin as a loyal and trusted agent for the next eleven odd years until 1937 – when he not only broke with Stalin but with the labor movement as well. His chief arena of activity was in the maritime industry. He sailed the seven seas. He was active in many parts of the world, including the Pacific coast of the United States. He participated in demonstrations, engaged in strikes and tested himself in military actions on the barricades (Hamburg events of 1923). He spent three years in the San Quentin penitentiary and three more years in Hitler’s prisons. Each time he went to jail in the service of the Comintern. He escaped from the Fascist butchers by entering, on the instructions of the GPU, into the service of the Gestapo for the purpose of counter-espionage. In point of activity his experience was intense and varied beyond the common run. It brought him nothing except disillusionment, disintegration and disaster.
 
He Drew No Political Lessons
Among the events to which he refers in his book are: the post-war crisis of capitalism (1918–21); the German revolution of 1923; the Chinese revolution of 1925–27; the periods of the First and Second Five Year Plans in the Soviet Union; the mass purges of the Comintern; the German events (1931–33) and Germany under Hitler; the Stalinist shift to the People’s Front policy; the Spanish Civil War; the Moscow Frameup Trials, and so on.
Yet throughout his narrative Valtin does not so much as attempt to draw a single political lesson. There is no answer to any of the burning questions. No hint of any desire to seek for a political evaluation of any of the experiences. No matter what happens – there is always a blind, cynical acceptance of the Kremlin’s orders.
What caused the debacle in Germany in 1931–1933? Valtin reports a conversation with Arthur Ewert, one of the Comintern leaders at the time. The Stalinists were then recklessly pursuing the policy of “Social-Fascism.” No united front with the “social-Fascists,” i.e., the Socialist Party which dominated the German trade union movement! No program for a joint struggle against Hitler! The ranks of the German working class remained split at a time when unity of front was a life-and-death issue. Stalin’s policy played directly into Hitler’s hands. It paralyzed the masses. It led, as Valtin correctly reports, to united actions between the Stalinists and the Nazis. Ewert expressed himself in opposition to this false and fatal course. What did Valtin do? “I did not ask myself,” he writes, “who was right and who was wrong.” The fate of Germany, and not Germany alone depended on the answer. In his eyes, it was unimportant. His “duty” was to denounce Ewert to his superiors in the Kremlin.
“My duty as a Communist,” he explains, “was to betray Arthur Ewert, my respected teacher.” Valtin has broken with Moscow but he still continues to vilify the name of communism. If he was taught such “duty,” it was never in the school of Bolshevism. The first duty of any man who aspires to call himself a communist is to fight for a correct political line. The only duty Valtin ever learned, or performed, as a docile and unscrupulous police agent, was to obey. He still helps to cover up all the abominations and crimes of Stalinism by this and many other assertions to the effect that in the rigid observance of “communist” duty is to be found the explanation for GPU treachery, GPU corruption, GPU infamy. It has become second nature with Valtin to think as a GPU’er. With Hitler’s victory there came as usual a change of line, a complete somersault. From the refusal to guarantee the unity of the working class confronted by its mortal enemy, Stalin turned to the acceptance of unity with the “democratic” section of the bourgeoisie, and diplomatic alliances with the democracies. Valtin first learned the news in Hitler’s jail. Through the lips of one of his comrades, also in jail, he reports:
“The Comintern policy has been modified. Now it’s Front Populaire, we defend democracy because democracy gives us the best chance of organizing the armed insurrection. An important tactical maneuver, though many of the comrades here are bitter about having gone to prison for a policy that’s now declared erroneous by Moscow.”
As is to be expected, Valtin himself does not express any “bitterness” or surprise at the change. He raises no doubts about the policy pursued prior to the turn. Nor is he impelled to evaluate the new policy for what it is. He passes on the Stalinist lie that the change involved only questions of “tactic.”
As a matter of fact he accepted the policy of the People’s Front all the more unquestioningly because his own degeneration was in its final stages. In explaining how he wormed his way into the Gestapo, he candidly avows:
“Many of the things I said (to the Gestapo) were not lies, they were conclusions I had arrived at in the self-searching and digging which many thousand lonely hours had invited.”
These “conclusions” were his first steps on the road of capitulation to the democratic wing of the imperialist bourgeoisie – a capitulation he was to consummate later on.
His break with the GPU and his capitulation to the bourgeoisie were two sides of Valtin’s process of degeneration. The fate of Firelei, his wife, whom his superiors betrayed to the Gestapo, served to speed up this evolution of the blind tool of Stalinism into an equally blind tool of “democratic” imperialism.
Campaign after campaign led only to defeats. “Like most communist campaigns,” writes Valtin, “this one, too, left a wake of shattered hopes, broken homes, and misery for its guileless participants.” Each defeat was hailed as a victory.
But why Stalinism led and can lead only to defeats – this was none of Valtin’s business while he himself participated in these campaigns. All the freer does he therefore feel now to leave the reader with the impression that the fault really lies with Bolshevism, that Bolshevism can lead only to defeats.
 
The Mind of a GPU Agent
Valtin looks back on all past experience through the mind and eyes of a GPU’er who himself remained unaware of the stages of his own degeneration as a revolutionist. To believe Valtin, the German Communist Party of 1923 did not differ essentially from the same party in later years. To the diseased GPU mind the Comintern of Lenin appears as if it were the corrupt, treacherous agency of Stalin. The Comintern underwent a profound transformation. Valtin reports these “changes” as if they were really of slight importance.
For instance, when he is freed from San Quentin in 1929 and returns to party activity, he is warned by one Soeder:
“Be careful about what you say when you meet the comrades higher up. You’ve been away a long time.”
“The Comintern,” continues Soeder, “has changed its face. It has been unified. It is now going like a torpedo. One direction only. No more vagaries. No internal discussion. No compromises.”
“I was to learn,” comments Valtin, “much more about this change of face during the coming weeks. Zinoviev and Trotsky had been purged. Bukharin was pushed away from the helm of the Comintern. Stalin now dominated Russia and, therefore, the Comintern as well.”
Why the purges? Why the complete suppression of internal party democracy? Had nothing changed about the Comintern except its “face”? What was happening in the Soviet Union? Valtin never bothered to find out. On leaving Hitler’s jail, he learned about the Moscow Frameup Trials. He was no more curious and questioning then than in 1929. This is what destroyed him and not the defeats.
Real Bolsheviks, as we have already said, are tempered not only in day-to-day struggles, not only in learning self-discipline, not only in becoming skilled in organization but, above all, in fighting for a political line, and assimilating the political lessons of the past. Only in this way can they inculcate in themselves loyalty to principles and an unswerving devotion to the historical interests of their class. Nothing can substitute for this. The most indomitable will in the world in powerless to compensate for the inability to learn and assimilate proletarian politics.
Without a correct program, without a correct politics line, organizations which appear so imposing in point of numbers, votes, parliamentary seats, agents, resources, etc. invariably reveal themselves under the impact of events to be hollow shells. Conversely, those organizations which in the eye of philistines seemed insignificant and hopeless enter the arena. of history as irresistible, world-shaking forces. But this does not happen overnight, nor by wishful thinking. It comes only as a result of years of gruelling, unswerving political struggle against terrible obstacles and the most powerful enemies. Only in this way can a Bolshevik party be built. It takes time to build a party. It took more than thirty years of struggle to build the party which made the Russian revolution.
Valtin never learned the lessons of the Russian experience. He was still a child when the October revolution occurred. Most people are able to learn only from their own experiences. Individuals gifted with the capacity of learning from the experiences of history or from the experience of others are rare. But in politics as in personal life those men and women who for one reason or another fail to learn anything at all from their own rich, even if cruel experience become invariably transformed into dupes, frauds or bankrupts.

He Lived Between Two Worlds
Valtin dreamed two dreams.
“I dreamt,” he writes, “of being able some day to lead vast armies of workers in the fire lines of revolution. 1 also dreamt of being, some day, master on the bridge of the finest liners afloat”
To many individuals life thus appears as a choice between rising with their class or making a career for themselves in the bourgeois world. There is no bridging the abyss between these two “dreams.”
The international network of the Kremlin drew a great many of its recruits from among those who found themselves caught like Valtin between two worlds: the one, the dead world of capitalism, the other, the still unborn world of socialism. The sharper their sense of personal frustration, all the more eagerly did they accept Stalinism as their salvation and unconditional subservience as their duty.
The masses are confronted with a different choice. Millions of workers the world over must either lead mankind out of the terrible chaos of capitalism, with its bigger and better super-bombs, or endure ever greater slavery, suffering and degradation. The way “out of the night” for the masses is to struggle for socialism.
It was this historic necessity that Valtin translated into a dream. His avowed desire today is to expose the GPU and the Gestapo, in order to save not only other “dreamers” but bourgeois democracy to boot. He has learned nothing.
He does not know that really to expose the GPU or the Gestapo it is necessary to do more than compile a catalogue of their violence and deceit, their perfidy and bestiality, their cynicism and ruthlessness, etc. etc.- It is necessary to lay bare the social and political roots of these organizations; to show what historical forces brought them into existence; to explain whence they derive their terrible power for evil; what their goal is. Above all, it is necessary to point the real way out, to provide a program of struggle against them and the system that breeds all such monstrosities.
This is impossible for Valtin. That is why his book is so suitable for the purposes of reaction.
The enormous publicity which has attended the publication and sale of this book is unquestionably inspired in large part by the interests of the bourgeoisie. They can use much of Valtin’s material for building up a hysteria about “spies,” “Fifth Columnists,” “subversive activities,” etcetera. Furthermore, the American imperialists would like nothing better than to smear the entire labor movement with the crimes of Stalinism.
We have nothing but contempt for those cynical lackeys of imperialism who raise their hands in hypocritical horror at the infamies and bestialities of the GPU or the Gestapo. They want to utilize the revulsion and indignation of the masses in order to harness them to the war machine. The entire history, past and present, of “democratic” imperialism is written in blood and filth, violence and deception, oppression and ruthlessness. Those who, like Valtin or Eastman, tell the workers otherwise are only deceiving them. Still more, they aid all the imperialists to carry capitalism successfully through the gravest crisis in its history since the first World War.
The Stalinists, for their part, have attacked this book, and clamor for the deportation of the author. They “criticize” Valtin not because of the use to which the American warmongers are seeking to put his book, but because it contains a mass of obviously authentic information concerning the operations of the GPU and its role in the labor movement. He names names, cites places and dates. They fear the effect of these revelations not only on the more recent recruits to the GPU and the rank and file of their party, but on the mass of the workers, for instance those in the maritime industry. The Kremlin has good grounds to fear lest the American workers prove capable of thinking for themselves, and of drawing correct conclusions from concrete data which dovetails with their own experience.
 



Although the military operations at the front are of extreme importance, the fate of the Soviet Union will not be decided on a purely military plane but on the arena of the class struggle.
It cannot be repeated too often that the greatest breach in the defensive power of the USSR lies not so much in any salient which the Nazi armored divisions have driven through the Red Army’s lines of defense as it does in the atomization, disorientation, demoralization and resulting passivity of the European labor movements. No matter how stubbornly and heroically the Red Army resists the Nazi onslaught, if the world working class remains prostrate the end result will be not only the downfall of Stalin’s regime but also of the remaining conquests of the October revolution. As Lenin and Trotsky warned time and again, the fate of the Soviet Union will be decided on the international arena.
The foreign policies of the Kremlin, carried out obediently and unquestioningly always and everywhere by the parties of the Third International, prepared the ground for Hitler’s previous triumphs. Stalin’s policy is once again clearing the way for Nazi successes. It is not accidental that from the Communist International there emanates today only the silence of the grave. Dimitrov, the “helmsman of the Comintern” has not dared to this day to open his mouth. When and if he is permitted to do so it will not be to rally the world masses to the policy of defense through revolutionary war. The Kremlin is once again staking everything on another alliance with imperialists, this time the camp of Anglo-American “democracies.” A victory of Churchill and Roosevelt opens up only the perspective of a new and much worse edition of the Versailles Treaty. What appeal can this possibly have for the German masses? It only drives them into Hitler’s hands. The German workers will begin to move only if the way out through socialism – through the Socialist United States of Europe – is opened for them. But this is the road which the Kremlin seeks to block at all costs. Stalinism is again dealing the greatest blows to the defense of the Soviet Union.
 
Stalin Fears the October Tradition
After having boasted for so many years of having “irrevocably” achieved the building of socialism in one country, after having announced that the very “threshold of Communism” had already been reached, the Kremlin now prohibits even a whisper about it. All references to socialism are carefully deleted from Moscow’s official statements, in particular, from all appeals to the German soldiers. The Manifesto of the Communist Party in this country follows suit (Daily Worker, June 30). This curries favor with London and Washington but will not spur German soldiers to fraternize with the Red Army fighters.
There is also another reason for Stalinist reticence about socialism. The Kremlin’s fear of the resurgence of the traditions, program and spirit of October surpasses its fear of the Nazi military might. This fear epitomizes the renegades from Bolshevism. This fear is expressed in everything the Kremlin says or does. It should be recalled that the Stalinists always have sworn that the great victories of the Civil War of 1918-1921 in which imperialist intervention was repelled on 22 fronts were primarily gained through the efforts of Stalin. But Molotov preferred to refer instead to the traditions of the Czarist triumph over Napoleon. He carefully evaded all references to those historical events with which Stalin is, according to the official myth, most closely associated. Was this perhaps done out of consideration for the modesty of the “Great Father of the Peoples”? No, it was done because the bureaucracy must at all costs prevent the banner of October and of the Civil War – the banner of Lenin and Trotsky – from being raised high again over the battlefields.
But the final decision in this sphere, as in so many others, does not rest with the Kremlin. It rests with the greatest internal bulwark of defense, the Soviet working class. With the aid of the international vanguard the Soviet workers must and can summon the workers of the world to a revolutionary war.
 
The Soviet Proletariat
The Soviet working class today is ten to twelve times stronger numerically than were the workers in 1917 who led the Russian masses to the conquest of October and who defended them against the entire capitalist world in the greatest civil war in modern times. Thirty million soviet workers now operate the modern industrial apparatus and inhabit the cities of one-sixth of the world.
In addition to quantitative differences there are profound qualitative differences between this numerically and productively more powerful working class and the workers under the Czar.
The abolition of private property and of the proprietors is sharply expressed in the social composition of modern Soviet cities. The world has never seen such urban centers before. For the first time in history, events will occur under wartime conditions in cities where no bourgeoisie exists. Nor is there an urban petty bourgeoisie in the proper sense of the term. The proletariat constitutes the overwhelming majority of the urban population with a thin crust of the bureaucracy at the top, and a thinner stratum of the Stalinist underworld at the bottom. Even in Moscow, Leningrad and other capital cities of the Federated Republics and autonomous regions the same thing holds true. The bureaucracy in these capital cities constitutes but a minority. Only in the cities of the occupied areas (Esthonia, Lithuania, Latvia) are there still sizeable remnants of the old ruling classes and a middle class of any proportion. But the cities in Soviet Union proper have no middle class. All the petty bourgeois tendencies are concentrated within the ranks of the bureaucracy itself, and in the villages. This means that the counter-revolution faces an unprecedented task in the cities, i.e., the decisive centers, the counter-revolution lacks a genuine class base and will have either to improvise it or to import it. On the other hand, this provides the revolution with class resources never before at its disposal.
Although the bulk of the workers stems from the land and was absorbed into industry during the first two Five Year Plans, the Soviet working class is far more homogeneous, despite its relative youth, than the Russian workers were in 1917, or the workers in any advanced capitalist countries are today. Trotsky estimated that at the outbreak of the February 1917 revolution, about 40 per cent of the Russian proletarian was of recent petty bourgeois origin, consisting predominantly of those who went into industry to avoid military service. Among the workers today not more than ten per cent are recent recruits from rural areas; moreover, they are extremely young and therefore tend to become proletarianized much more rapidly and readily than older peasants. The other workers who originally came from the villages have already behind them from five to ten years of proletarianization.
 
Contrast Between Bourgeoisie and Kremlin
The bourgeoisie possesses many means for intensifying differentiation within the ranks of workers. The bourgeoisie of any given nation can create a stable labor aristocracy; a social ladder, as it were, with gradations between the various skilled workers, and between the skilled and the unskilled. In addition, through the functioning of its educational, religious and state organs, the bourgeoisie is able to divide the workers along racial and religious lines. It is able to maintain its own political agencies within the working class from the outright bourgeois parties down to the various varieties of reformism.
In contrast to this the Kremlin bureaucracy, which lacks a genuine class function, has not been able really to stratify the Soviet workers. Not that it hasn’t sought to create a labor aristocracy and to create all possible divisions among the workers.
But the Kremlin, while successful in creating an unbridgeable gulf between the privileged bureaucracy and the rest of the population has not been successful, despite all its efforts, in its attempts to foster any broad and stable labor aristocracy as a basis of support. What happened instead was this: the Stalinist aristocrats of labor – the Stakhanovists – became incorporated with the bureaucracy itself, replacing in many instances the older generations of revolutionists who became bureaucratized during and after the period of the NEP and who were by and large removed during the purges (1935–1938).
Furthermore, the marked tendency in recent years has been to drive down the living standards of all workers, both skilled and unskilled. This has acted to fuse the various sections of the working class in a common hatred against the rapacious and oppressive bureaucracy.
The living standards of all workers must now inevitably fall still lower. The working day, which was fixed at eight hours and a six-day week by the vicious decrees of June 21, 1940 has now been hiked to nine, ten and eleven hours a week. A dispatch from Moscow dated June 27, 1941, announces a decree which makes “obligatory overtime work from one to three hours daily, both for all workers and office employees.” (Daily Worker, June 28). This means a legal working day of 11 hours and more.
 
New Conflicts Between Workers And Bureaucrats
The vast majority of the Soviet workers will undoubtedly strain every ounce of energy to supply the fighters at the front. But their efforts come at all points into conflict with the irresponsible administration. The contradiction between the bureaucratic method of management and the demands of defense instead of weakening will intensify literally with every hour of war. For instance, the transportation facilities, already overstrained in peacetime, must now be used primarily to supply the front. How will the plants be supplied?
The already monstrous physical strain upon the workers must presently reach the breaking point. The bureaucracy apparently realizes this, and has offered a special inducement in the form of an increase in pay for overtime. The decree specifies that “remuneration for obligatory overtime (is) one and a half times the regular rates.” What will the workers be able to purchase with their increased wages in the face of scarcity and skyrocketing prices? Nevertheless, the “raise” is highly symptomatic. It is the first time in years that the Kremlin has deemed it advisable to make any sort of concession to the workers. It is a tacit admission of the rising tide of opposition.
To continue functioning, Soviet industry requires entirely different incentives and entirely different methods of management. Initiative on the part of the masses is now more indispensable than ever before. The struggle for rational working conditions and for the revival of workers’ democracy coincides at all points with the life and death needs of Soviet enterprises and of the Red Army. The bureaucracy bars the way. The traditions of October and of the Civil War – the program of Lenin and Trotsky – point the only way out. Will the Soviet workers take this road which is dictated by necessity? They have no other.
To be sure, there exists as yet no organized and independent political force within the ranks of Soviet labor. But it ought not be forgotten that there still remain many millions in the land who participated directly or indirectly in the October revolution and who passed through the years of the Civil War. There are other thousands who have not forgotten the lessons of the struggle of the Left Opposition from 1923 to 1929, a struggle which reached the masses. In Stalin’s jails and concentration camps now sit many who are capable of providing the necessary leadership and of working and fighting shoulder to shoulder with the masses, the Red Army ranks and with the new leaders now being tempered at the front, in the factories, the collective farms and among the youth.
The traditions and methods of the great historical experiences of the Soviet masses will revive under the pressure of this gravest crisis. Once revived they will sweep the land with a speed and power beyond that of any Panzer divisions the imperialist world could muster. The very fact that Stalin chooses to keep so rigid a silence on the subject of October is in itself evidence that the bureaucracy already senses its approaching death.
 
The Soviet Peasantry
What will the peasants do? They still constitute the great majority of the Soviet population. Has this social force, next in importance only to the proletariat, been irretrievably lost to the revolution because of the criminal policies of Stalinism? Or will they again as in 1917 and in the Civil War follow the lead of the revolutionary workers?
The differentiation within the peasantry – its heterogeneity – contrary to Stalin’s empty boasts of yesterday – does not fundamentally differ from that in capitalist countries. In general, the agricultural population is divided into the same main classes as exist in capitalist countries – the rural bourgeoisie (landlords, large scale farmers), the rural petty bourgeoisie (the well-to-do-farmers, the individual proprietors), and the rural proletariat (the agricultural laborers).
Although the Czarist landlords have been abolished along with the old rural bourgeoisie, there nevertheless remains in Soviet agriculture a clearly delineated rural petty bourgeoisie in the shape of the kolkhoz (collective farm) aristocracy. Among the so-called “millionaire kolkhozi” are even to be observed personages who strikingly resemble large scale farmers, i.e., rural bourgeois. In other words capitalist tendencies, far from having been abolished in agriculture, have merely been driven inside the collectives, and have luxuriated there. The capitalist tendencies in the collectives are further reinforced by some three million individual homesteads which have survived. In addition there are almost two million artisans most of whom are organized into cooperatives, with special privileges, tax exemptions, etc. granted them in January of this year. As the scarcity of foodstuffs and necessities becomes more and more acute, all the individualistic tendencies in agriculture will intensify. This is one of the main reservoirs of the counter-revolution. With the aid of Hitler or other imperialists, these elements might well be able to turn the hatred of all the peasants against Stalin into channels leading to capitalist restoration.
The camp of the revolution, however, possesses this advantage: Hitler has really little to offer the peasants. The mask of “liberator” sits poorly on a conqueror, all the more so an invader who comes to pillage after first sowing destruction and death. Phrases and promises, even threats and violence, will carry little weight with the great masses of the peasantry. They have had their fill of this diet from Stalin.
The most backward and superstitious peasant is capable of reasoning. He is cognizant of the superiority of tractors and scientific large scale farming. Besides there has been an acute shortage of horses since the days of forced collectivization when all cattle were slaughtered. How will the crops be raised?
Once the peasant is convinced that the fruits of his labor will not be devoured by bureaucratic blood suckers or fascist despoilers – nothing will swerve him from his support of the resurgent revolution. Once the peasant is convinced that he is free to choose whether he wishes to cultivate his own land or to participate as a full-fledged and genuine shareholder in a collective farm, he will fight tooth and nail against the counter-revolution both from within and without. Once the peasant is convinced that the nationalized economy will be so planned as to take his vital needs into account he will readily lay down his life in defense of it.
He will be further impelled to this choice by the fact that even his present scanty ration is directly threatened by the Nazis. All history teaches that the bitterest struggles are waged over the scantiest rations. Whatever territories Hitler may succeed in overrunning temporarily, he will have to hold with armies of occupation. It took more than 500,000 German soldiers to hold the Ukraine during the last war, when the Kaiser’s Germany had the support of the old Ukrainian and Russian ruling classes. The results were very disappointing to the Kaiser. Hitler may well experience even a greater disappointment.
Success for the counter-revolution can come only in the event that the proletariat fails to advance its own class program, and follows blindly Stalin’s policy. The majority of the peasants who are members of the collectives or employees of Machine Tractor Stations, Sovkhozi (state farms), etc., are really agricultural laborers. Their interests coincide most closely with the interests of the urban workers. They will rally to the program of October; no other program can win them over, least of all the nationalist demagogy of the Kremlin.
 
The Soviet Youth
A crucial role in deciding the fate of the USSR is destined for its youth, the primary reservoir of the revolution. The giant Soviet proletariat is young not only in point of formation but also in actual age. A decisive section consists of young men and women under 27. Among the staunchest fighters in the Red Army are those young soldiers who received their training under the old command – the legendary heroes of the Civil War, the idols of the people, who modernized and mechanized the troops, developed the air force, introduced parachute troops and many other innovations, and whom Stalin murdered.
The bureaucrats stand in greater fear of the youth than of any other single section of the population. The Komsomol (the Russian YCL) has been purged more frequently and savagely than any other branch of the apparatus. Five years ago, shortly before the staging of the first Moscow Frameup Trial in 1936, the Komsomol was dissolved as a political organization for fear lest it develop into an opposition political party. The ideas and program of Trotskyism (Bolshevism) have from the outset met their maximum response and sympathy precisely among the Soviet youth.
Even in its spontaneous forms the resistance of the youth to the regime was marked by its militant spirit. For example, the official press was compelled to admit that it was the young workers and members of the Komsomol who were in the forefront of resistance to the Ukases of June 26, 1940, which lengthened the working day to eight hours (and six days), and chained the workers to their jobs like medieval serfs.
The most astonishing thing is that this militancy characterizes even striplings. When the decrees were adopted drafting children and youngsters from fourteen to seventeen into large scale industry, mines and railways, the bureaucracy insisted on paying them only one-third of the prevailing wages. But these bureaucrats reckoned without the children. They forced the Kremlin to change its mind and to grant them very substantial increases.
Article 19 of Order No.1 issued by the Labor Reserves Administration in October 1940 fixed the following wage scale:
“It is hereby established that one-third of the revenues accruing from the fulfillment of orders as well as work done ... during their period of training for industry is allotted to the state budget; one third is to remain at the disposal of the Director ... and one-third is to be given into the hands of those fulfilling the work.” (Pravda, October 5, 1940. Our emphasis)
The children began work on December 1, 1940. Eight weeks later, their wages were increased to 80 per cent of the prevailing rates for those sixteen to seventeen and to 50 per cent for those fifteen and under (Pravda, February 5, 1941) Noteworthy, indeed, is the fact that the initiative compelling this “concession” came from below, that is, from the most defenseless section of the working class, the child laborers. More than a million of these children are already in industry. Let us recall that the original party of Bolshevism under Czarist illegality was a party of very young workers.
 
The Stalinist Bureaucracy
The chief obstacle in the path of successful defense is the Stalinist bureaucracy. Although all data relating to this malignant and monstrous growth upon the organism of the first workers’ state in history are a most closely guarded secret, it is nevertheless possible to estimate its numerical strength as somewhere in the neighborhood of ten per cent of the entire population, i.e., from 10 to 15 million, approximately twice the size of the former ruling classes and their retinue in Czarist Russia.
In point of social origin and composition this bureaucracy is no monolith but a sort of crude patchwork. The oldest generation of those who either supported Stalin or capitulated to him after Lenin’s death, has been annihilated physically. Hardly more than a few hundred survivors still remain, most of whom are in jail. The next generation, brought up and trained in the school of Stalinism and in utter ignorance of Bolshevism, its history, its traditions, its leaders, its methods, and its program, was likewise decimated during the purges before and after the signing of the Stalin-Hitler pact (1935-1938). The “bloodless” purges of 1940 – after the Finnish invasion – completed the devastation of its ranks. The incumbent bureaucracy now largely consists of callow recruits.
Among them are many sons and daughters of the former ruling classes, the progeny of former landlords, former capitalists, bourgeois intellectuals, Czarist generals, functionaries, etc. Another large tier is composed of Stakhanovists, most of whom are of very recent peasant origin and background. Fewest are those with proletarian background and origin.
In the coming events, the bureaucracy will not be able to play an independent role. The final differentiation in its ranks will occur along class lines. There already exists an embryonic Fascist wing, typified by such individuals as Butenko, who, it will be recalled, deserted to Mussolini. Hitler no doubt hopes there are many more Butenkos who will desert to him.
The days of this bureaucracy, as it is now constituted, are numbered. The war submits it to the final test.
Stalin’s regime now stands stripped of all its trappings and masks, naked before the world in its true despicable reactionary colors under conditions which make secrecy or camouflage no longer possible.
“There are no Municheers in the Soviet Union!” screams the Daily Worker in one more hysterical attempt to hide all the abominations and crimes of Stalinism. The Moscow Frameups, all the purges, the beheading of the Red Army, the destruction of the entire generation of Bolsheviks who made the October revolution and fought to victory in the Civil War, and, the crowning crime of all, the murder of Leon Trotsky – all this, these hirelings of the GPU are trying to palm off as measures indispensable for the defense of the Soviet Union.
What these scoundrels are really saying is this: that it is impossible for Stalin any longer to produce scapegoats for his own crimes. Yes, the Soviet masses and the whole world will now fix the responsibility for every breach in the lifelines of Soviet defense where it really belongs – upon the Judas-Cain in the Kremlin.
 
Why Stalin Must Fall
Stalin’s regime – which has stifled all initiative, every living voice and every creative tendency in Soviet society – must crumble if only for the reason that initiative and creative ability are most indispensable precisely in war-time. Wherever this intiative arises it will come into mortal conflict with the bureaucracy.
The initial impetus against the regime may come from the beheaded Red Army which is in direst and most immediate need to free itself from the dead hand of the totalitarian “leadership.” The Kremlin has not the ability nor the policy for preserving the morale of the soldiers; it cannot keep the front properly supplied and equipped. The Kremlin and its flunkies put their own prestige and power above all other considerations.
Moscow’s official war communiques reveal the panic in the Kremlin which seeps through in its frantic attempts to paint up the officer-corps, to instill it with confidence, and, especially, bolster up its prestige. It is the lieutenants, majors, colonels, who are singled out for acclaim. If a rank-and-file Red soldier receives brief mention, it is only to mention his unquestionable readiness to shed his life-blood under any and all conditions. Yet it is precisely the initiative and the spirit of daring of the rank-and-file soldier and of the lowest command which will prove most decisive on the military arena. The Kremlin has done everything in its power to destroy this. Only a revolutionary war can release the vast creative forces latent in the masses at the front as well as behind the lines.
We proceed from the knowledge that the strangled revolution still lives in the USSR. Every day of war will refresh the memories of those who fought in Trotsky’s Red Army. Their sons and daughters, too, have not forgotten.
But war speeds up in the extreme all processes, not only those of regeneration but also those of degeneration. It is a race for time between the still living forces of October and the march of the German imperialist war machine whose path is being cleared more by the corrupt and degenerate regime than by its own military might. Stalin is staking everything on the assistance of Churchill and Roosevelt. No force is too reactionary for Stalin if only he can temporarily summon it to his aid. His latest ally is the Russian Orthodox Church in the person of the Acting Patriarch Sergei, Primate of the Ail-Russian Orthodox Church and Metropolitan of Moscow. Pray on, gentlemen!
We, however, stake everything on the real defense of the USSR – revolutionary war. We stake everything on the resurgence of the October spirit and the traditions of the Civil War.
The strength of the resistance of the Soviet Union is not, as Hitler calculates, identical with the strength of resistance of Stalin’s regime. The revolution once arisen will prove unconquerable. It will rise – as it has risen in the past – from the shambles of the most terrible defeats – and lift high once again the great and glorious banner of struggle and victory – the unconquerable banner of the October revolution and of the Civil War – the banner of Lenin and Trotsky.
 



On the eve of the Second Imperialist War, on June 21, 1939, Leon Trotsky not only predicted the Stalin-Hitler pact, but made the following analysis or Hitler’s future violation of this pact and of Hitler’s calculations in invading the Soviet Union:
“In order to seize the French and British colonies Hitler must first protect his rear and he is cherishing the idea of a preventive war against the USSR. True, enough, the German High Command – on the basis of Its own past experience – is well aware of the difficulties of occupying Russia, or even only the Ukraine; Hitler, however, is basing his calculations on the instability of Stalin’s regime. He reasons that a few serious defeats of the Red Army would suffice for the overthrow of the Kremlin government. And inasmuch as there are no other organized forces in the country, and since the White Guard émigrés are completely alien to the people, therefore once Stalin is overthrown chaos would ensue for a long time. And such a condition Hitler could utilize, on the one side, for outright economic plunder, the seizure of the gold reserves, export of all sorts of raw materials, etc.; and, on the other, for a blow against the West.” (The Enigma of the USSR, Bulletin of the Russian Opposition, No. 79–80)
 
Hitler’s Calculations Were False
Today there can be no question that Hitler’s calculations are those that Trotsky described. Without in any way attempting at this early date to draw the final balance sheet of the invasion, it is nevertheless already possible to say that Hitler miscalculated gravely in identifying the strength of the resistance of the USSR with the strength of Stalin’s regime. In his plans to plunder the country Hitler has already met with an unexpected surprise. Obviously, one of his immediate objectives was the seizure of the ripening crops of the Ukraine. This called for decisive military victories on the Southern front, and the occupation of the Ukraine by not later than the last week in July. Otherwise the crops could be readily harvested and removed or just as readily destroyed. The resistance of the Red Army has made it well nigh impossible to seize the current crops. This means that the German imperialists, even in the event of an ultimate occupation of the Ukraine, can only bank on next year’s harvest. Under the conditions of armed occupation, this is by no means a favorable perspective, as the lessons of the last German occupation of the Ukraine testify. Any further disruption of the High Command’s timetable can only aggravate this serious blow to the calculations of the German imperialists.
Far more important, however, is the fact that an equally unwelcome surprise is developing for the Nazis in the field of their political calculations so far as the Soviet Union is concerned. The crisis of the Kremlin regime is not at all unfolding along the lines envisaged by the Nazi strategists. It is becoming more and more self-evident that the crisis of Stalin’s government is beginning to assume forms without precedent in history.
Thus, the effect of the war on the regime is contrary to what might have been expected. It is almost an axiom that the shakiest regimes are stabilized by war, if only temporarily. As a matter of fact, innumerable instances can be cited of ruling classes deliberately plunging into military adventures precisely in the hope of thus forestalling their own overthrow. Suffice it to recall the case of Russian Czarism. The Romanov dynasty was greatly strengthened at the outbreak of hostilities in 1914, and was even able for a time to survive military blows far greater than those which almost brought about its downfall in the Russo-Japanese war of 1904–1905.
Although Stalin’s government is unlike any other in history, it too was unquestionably strengthened internally at the very moment that Hitler issued marching orders to his armies. Yet in the face of this indubitable, even if temporary, stabilization, Stalin pursues a course which seems on the surface inexplicable.
 
All Key Posts in Stalin’s Hands
In the brief space of a week, the ruler who holds the post of Premier, not only constituted a special, all-powerful War Cabinet with himself as Chairman, i.e., avowed dictator, but also gathered into his own hands every single thread of state power. He reshuffled the General Staff; restored dual authority in the Red Army by reviving the institution of political commissars, thus strengthening his own hold on the Army by dealing a blow to the power and authority of the officer-caste he had himself created only last year. Still more, he assumed direct military command, replacing Timoshenko as Commissar of Army and Navy. His latest step is to take personal charge of the entire police apparatus – the “united” GPU – which he had himself reorganized only last February.
Such measures have been applied before, – by other governments. But as a rule, only in direst straits. Why are such exceptional measures needed?
If Stalin’s regime had a genuine class base, if it rested on the support of a genuine ruling class, then such measures would not have been necessary at this time. But Stalin lacks such a base. His regime has from, the outset rested on the bureaucracy, and its various appendages. The Kremlin’s bureaucratic prop has crumbled beyond repair. This is no longer a prognosis but a fact. Stalin acknowledges it by his decrees which are tantamount, to his saying openly that he can now maintain himself in power only if he has personal control of the military-police apparatus. No other “normal” channels remains. This unprecedented condition of a single man, surrounded by a handful of hand-picked stooges – whose composition, moreover, changes almost daily – trying to maintain himself in power in war time constitutes, of course, an equation with many unknowns, and many surprises.
But one thing can be stated with certainty, the class forces in the USSR – the proletariat and the peasantry – cannot be laced into such an artificial dictatorial strait jacket for any protracted period of time. It is precisely against this contingency – namely, the return of the Soviet proletariat and Soviet peasantry as independent political forces on the historical arena – that Stalin is girding himself. That is the real meaning of his acts of desperation.
 



The recapture of Rostov by the Red Army – the first victory for the Soviet Union and the first major reverse for the Nazis in this war – is most welcome news to every friend and defender of the workers state. A position of great strategic importance has been regained. Rostov, gateway to the Caucasian oilfields, commands Soviet pipe lines supplying the Red Army and the industries with indispensable fuel, and is the pivot of the southern front.
This victory gives the Red Army forces a much-needed opportunity for restoring the gravely weakened southern front; it has undoubtedly dealt a blow to the morale of the German troops, and, conversely, raised the confidence of the Red soldiers and the Soviet masses; it will inspire the heroic fighters in the occupied countries to greater action and initiative; and it indicates that it is not yet too late, despite the terrible losses and defeats of the first five months of the war, to save the Soviet Union from destruction.
But it would be a fatal illusion and of no service to the defense of the USSR – to believe that now the tide has definitively turned in favor of the Red Army.
The Nazis still hold an enormous preponderance on the military arena. Despite their reverse at Rostov, the Nazi drive to encircle Moscow has not been lessened but intensified. The advances in the Klin and Volokolamsk areas, admitted by the Kremlin, imperil still further Moscow’s lines of communications and supply. Only three such supply routes are now actually open, Leningrad remains besieged, and the recent Nazi advance in the Tikhvin area endangers not only Leningrad itself but also Moscow, since Tikhvin is directly on the road to Vologda, the capture of which would cut a vital supply route to the capital.
 
Illuminating Admission
One of the most significant aspects of the Rostov victory is the admission by the German General Staff that the workers of the city played a crucial role in driving back the invading troops. Far from conquering the city, the invaders had entered a living inferno – the flames of the Revolution, which is still alive, were licking at their heels. It is hardly surprising that the German High Command pours out its venom at these workers; that it resorts to bestial threats of “reprisals against the city’s civilian population.”
It is equally understandable why the Nazi propaganda agencies suddenly dropped this “excuse” for the retreat from Rostov, and produced a different alibi. Nothing is more dangerous to Hitler than this news that the revolutionary workers of Rostov have stripped his military machine of its myth of invincibility in which the Nazi propaganda machine has so long sought to envelop it. Once again history is reaffirming the greatest lesson of all, namely, that the key to the whole situation in the Soviet Union as in Europe, Germany and the whole world is in the hands of the workers themselves.
What is necessary to spread the victory of Red Rostov to the entire front, and, above all, to Hitler’s rear?
There is only one way, and that is by returning to the policy and methods of revolutionary war employed by the Soviet masses under the leadership of Lenin and Trotsky in the days of the Civil War and imperialist intervention. The Red Army was victorious then because the soldiers openly fought under the banner of socialism and international solidarity; because the Soviets, representing the workers and peasants functioned democratically behind the lines; because the revolutionary propaganda disintegrated the morale of the enemy armies.
The German High Command who have not forgotten how their Ukrainian armies of occupation were “poisoned by the virus of Bolshevism” must tremble at even the thought of a repetition of that struggle and strategy on their armies today.
Stalin’s greatest crime is his rejection of this policy of revolutionary war in favor of a policy of dependence on aid from the “democratic” imperialists.
 
What Holds German Soldiers Back
As long as the bulk of the German army continues to believe that only another Versailles Treaty, or something far worse, is in store for them in event of defeat, they will continue to support the war. Stalin’s policies enable the Nazi leaders to tell the German masses that the workers state and the British Empire are one in their war aims to crush Germany. Goebbels is able to hammer away at this point at the moment when the German generals are trying to reform the ranks of their southern armies and to bring up reinforcements. Even now as the crucial battle for Moscow continues unabated, the main weapon of the German High Command in whipping up the spirit of the soldiers is this threat of what will happen to the German people at the hands of the imperialists if the German armies are defeated.
In this way the effect of the. Rostov defeat upon the morale of the German troops is in large measure dissipated. Naturally, military defeats are bound to have repercussions, the soldiers begin to think and the seeds of doubt are planted. But only an appeal to the German workers and soldiers, pledging them solidarity and support in their struggle against Hitler and the German ruling class, pledging them aid in the struggle against “democratic” imperialists, and against another Versailles, can have the necessary explosive effect on the German masses.
 
Stalin Surrenders This Weapon
Stalin has surrendered this decisive weapon in return for promises of aid from Churchill and Roosevelt. What these promises amount to were shown in Churchill’s recent statement that Stalin can expect no military aid from Britain until possibly 1943. This means – as we have persistently pointed out – that the Soviet Union with its admitted shortage of tanks and aircraft, can depend only on the aid of the revolutionary masses of Germany and Europe.
With Stalin’s policies and the Stalinist leadership the Rostov victory, inspiring as it is, can remain only an episode.
If the necessary steps are taken, if the policy of revolutionary war and revolutionary appeal to the European masses is adopted, the victory at Rostov could immediately be utilized for the turning point in the war.
 



As a consequence of the extension of the second World War to the Pacific, the Kremlin which has been clamoring so loudly for a “second front” in the west is now faced with the prospect of having to wage war on a second front in the east.
To be sure, the Kremlin has signed a treaty of “non-aggression” with Japan. The latest dispatches from Kuibyshev indicate that the Kremlin hopes to evade being drawn into the conflict through diplomatic maneuvers. A.T. Steele cables from Kuibyshev as follows:
“Allied diplomats here are eagerly awaiting clarification from Moscow of the Soviet government’s policy on the Pacific war. Up to now the Soviet policy has been one of aloof neutrality based on the Russo-Japanese pact of April 13. Russia has done everything possible to avoid a conflict on her Far Eastern front. The Russians are proceeding with extreme caution.” (N.Y. Post, Dec. 9, 1941)
But how is it possible now to continue this “policy of aloof neutrality”?
 
“Aloof Neutrality”
Any attempt on Stalin’s part to pursue such a policy would hardly be met with approval by his present allies. In the struggle with Japan, England and the U.S. can wage in the period immediately ahead primarily naval and aerial warfare and operate from bases far removed from Japan’s strategic centers. On the other hand, the active participation of the USSR would not only engage Japan on land by setting in motion the Far Eastern Red Army, but also immediately expose to blows Japan’s home centers which are only 750 miles away from Vladivostok.
On the day before the outbreak of war in the Pacific, Carrol Binder, the editor of the Chicago Daily News Foreign Service, wrote:
“If Japan starts hostilities in the Pacific, Russia will play an important role and will influence events by inaction as well as by action. If the United States and Russia find it possible to collaborate effectively, they can cook Japan’s goose in far shorter order than will be possible if they act independently.” (N.Y. Post, Dec. 6, 1941)
This undoubtedly is a semi-official expression of Washington’s views. It is obvious that Allied diplomats have been exerting and will continue to exert increasing pressure on the Kremlin to “collaborate effectively,” that is, to participate directly in the war against Japan.
 
Japan’s Position
So far as Japan is concerned, the logic of her position calls for an eventual assault upon Vladivostok, and the Maritime Provinces. It is impossible for Japan to conduct the war in the Pacific without safeguarding its flank, The very threat that Vladivostok can be used as an air and naval base against Japan calls for “preventive” military action. Naturally, the Japanese militarists want to choose their own time for this crucial move. The arena for Stalin’s diplomatic maneuvers is thus restricted not only by his “democratic” allies, but also by Japan herself.
It is therefore clear that far from being strengthened by the latest development of events, the USSR has been gravely weakened. The idea propagated by the Stalinists that the extension of the imperialist war would aid the defense of the USSR has now boomeranged on Stalin.
Once again, the march of history is demonstrating the utter bankruptcy of Stalinist leadership and Stalinist policies. The Kremlin is incapable of foreseeing and preparing for anything. It is once again trying to resort to a policy of evasion. Meanwhile, the illusion of a “western front” has translated itself into reality as a war on two fronts for the heroic soldiers, workers and peasants of the USSR.
But whereas the Kremlin could only plead for the opening of a “western front,” Churchill and Roosevelt are in a strategic position to capitalize on the impasse into which Stalin’s policies have brought the Soviet Union. Stalin’s foreign policy, his support of the imperialist democracies, places the latter in a position of being “justified” in demanding the immediate entry of the USSR into the war in the Pacific.
How could Stalin or his lackeys explain away any attempt to maintain “aloof neutrality”? The editors of the Daily Worker not only declare that the war in the Pacific “parallels the Nazi attack upon the Soviet Union” but also agree with the editors of the New York Herald Tribune that only “one war is being fought in the world today” (Daily Worker, Dec. 9, 1941). The only logical consequence of such a policy is to advocate and support the demand that the Soviet Union immediately declare war against Japan. However, the Daily Worker is silent on this point. They await word from their Kremlin masters.
How do matters stand now with respect to the question of material aid on which the Kremlin banks so much?
In the next period both London and Washington can readily explain any decrease, in the already inadequate trickle of supplies to the USSR. Vladivostok, the only Soviet port which is not icebound, has been virtually cut off. Even if they were inclined to run the risk, very few British or American ships could successfully penetrate the blockade so close to Japanese home waters.
Furthermore, both the British and American navies will now require all the available ships in the Pacific for supplying their own needs and maintaining their own land and naval units there. Apart from the icebound port of Archangel, there remains only the land route across Iran, and supplies over this route as well depend primarily on available ships. Any attempts on the Kremlin’s part to maintain “aloof neutrality” will in the long run mean a cessation of all material aid. On the other hand, the Soviet Union faces the prospect of fighting on two fronts with the probability of receiving even less material aid in the future than in the past.
The terrible danger which the Soviet Union confronts as a result of the extension of the war to the Pacific is this quite obvious. Stalinist policies are incapable of doing anything except aggravating this danger.
Once again, history is reaffirming the fact that only revolutionary policy can save the Soviet Union. A revolutionary appeal to the masses of Germany and of Japan could transform the course of developments literally overnight. Such an appeal would have almost immediate repercussions in the white-hot atmosphere of Japan, whose rulers have gambled everything on a desperate military adventure in order to maintain themselves in power.
To defend the USSR successfully it is necessary to summon the workers and peasants of Europe and Asia to struggle for socialism, the only outside aid that can stop war and save mankind.
 



Precisely during the period of the Stalin-Hitler pact, which the Kremlin and its hirelings now claim had been utilized as a breathing space to strengthen the country, the basic plants of the USSR were operating at two-thirds, one-half, two-fifths of their capacity, and even below these levels. In a previous article (Fourth International, November 1941), we adduced, from Stalin’s own official data, incontrovertible proof of this catastrophic condition of Soviet industry.
 
Stalin’s Secret Purge of 1940–41
Stalin sought to emerge from the crisis in his customary manner—through new repressions and purges. The Kremlin’s sole concern on this as on all other occasions was to unload its own responsibility on scapegoats. Sufficient data are now available to demonstrate that the little-known and “bloodless” purge which was unleashed by Stalin toward the end of 1940 and which continued throughout the first part of 1941 assumed proportions second only to the monstrous blood purges of 1936-1938.
The signal for this purge came with the call for the Eighteenth Party Conference which convened in Moscow in February 1941.
A partial list of the People’s Commissariats that were decimated during the “discussion period” in the months prior to the Conference follows:

The People’s Commissariat of Ferrous Metallurgy
The People’s Commissariat of Coal The People’s Commissariat of Oil
The People’s Commissariat of Non-Ferrous Metallurgy
The People’s Commissariat of Light Industry
The People’s Commissariat of Defense Industries
The People’s Commissariat of Ship-Building
The People’s Commissariat of Transport
The People’s Commissariat of Building Industry
The People’s Commissariat of Communications
The People’s Commissariat of State Planning
The People’s Commissariat of Domestic Trade
The People’s Commissariat of Foreign Trade
The People’s Commissariat of Health
The People’s Commissariat of Justice
The People’s Commissariat of Cinema
The People’s Commissariat of Art, etc., etc.

At the Conference itself six members of the Central Committee of the Communist Party (among them Maxim Litvinov), 15 alternates and 9 members of the Central Auditing Commission were expelled on the charge of “incompetence” and “failure to fulfill their duties.” The People’s Commissars of Agriculture, Medium Machine Building, Timber and Defense Industry were purged. Immediately after the Conference the ax fell on the Commissariats of Aircraft, Munitions, Electrical Industry, Chemical Industry, Marine Transport, River Transport and Fishing Industry.
All this was only the beginning. The Moscow press, issues of which are finally available, reveals conditions that verge on the incredible. Pravda from March 2 to March 27 reported further “reorganization” in the following Commissariats:

The People’s Commissariat of State Control
The People’s Commissariat of Medium Machine Building
The People’s Commissariat of Light Industry
The People’s Commissariat of Munitions
The People’s Commissariat of Defense
The People’s Commissariat of State Control, Personnel Division
The State Planning Commission
The Council of People’s Commissars
The People’s Commissariat of Timber Industry
The People’s Commissariat of Oil Industry
The People’s Commissariat of Non-Ferrous Industry
The People’s Commissariat of Agriculture
The People’s Commissariat of Electrical Industry
The People’s Commissariat of Internal Affairs (the GPU)
The People’s Commissariat of Textile Industry

The Kremlin’s average during this period was approximately a Commissariat a day. Many of the Commissariats were purged several times during the month of March alone. Over and above this the columns of Pravda in the space of a little more than three weeks in March contain reports of the prosecution of Soviet industrial and administrative staffs on criminal charges  in the following key industrial areas: Gorky, Kursk, Novosibirsk, Moscow, Stalingrad oblast (province), Dniepropetrovsk oblast, Kemerovo and Novorossisk oblasts, Sumsk oblast, and so on—in short, from one end of the country to the other.
 
The Official Explanation for the Purge
The purge reached its peak in the months of April and May, i.e., on the very eve of Hitler’s invasion. Official confirmation of this is contained in the Bolshevik, the “theoretical” organ of Stalin’s Communist Party. The leading editorial in the March issue of the Bolshevik is in effect an order to “cleanse” the primary organs of the party, under the guise of “elections” scheduled for the months of April and May.
“The elections of party organs as the primary organizations,” declares this editorial, “must assist us in uncovering the actual state of affairs in every enterprise. Bold Bolshevik criticism can be of decisive help in laying bare all the inadequacies, in lashing the uncouth attitude toward carrying out the entrusted tasks, and in exposing the do-nothings, babblers and ignoramuses who are acting aa a brake on our progress.” (Bolshevik, March 1941, No. 6, pp. 4–6)
In the period of the Moscow, frame-ups which preceded the Stalin-Hitler pact, the Kremlin labelled its victims and scapegoats as “enemies of the people,” “spies,” “wreckers,” “saboteurs,” “diversionists,” etc. The formula for the 1940-41 purge reads: “do-nothings,” “babblers,” “ignoramuses.” By the admission of the Kremlin, this was the kind of “leadership” it had itself foisted upon Soviet industry as a consequence of its monstrous purges. This is how Stalin “strengthened” the Soviet Union by his purges! Naturally, we shall wait in vain for an explanation from such gentlemen as Davies, Hopkins, Ingersoll, who together with the liberals in the New Republic, have at this late hour jumped forward to whitewash Stalin.
The direct connection between this drive against “do-nothings,” “ignoramuses,” etc. and the crisis in Soviet industry is explained by the editors of Bolshevik as follows:
“The elections of party organs must demonstrate whether or not the party organizations and their leaders are fighting daily and consistently to fulfill the decisions of the Eighteenth Party Conference; whether or not they have begun everywhere to penetrate in essence into production and to interest themselves in questions of new technique and technology, in the organization of production, in the proper placement of individuals and their utilization, in the basic costs of production and the quality of production.” (idem, page 5)
If these words have any meaning at all, they mean that Soviet industry had been left in charge of people who were least concerned with and least qualified to deal with its functioning and its most elementary problems. And as if to leave no room for doubt on this score, the editors of Bolshevik flatly declares:
“Unfortunately there ore still not a few leaders — both in the party and industry—who concern themselves with production only superficially; they do not penetrate into the economy of their enterprises; they try to evade responsibility by mouthing meaningless common-places. One need have no doubt that such leaders will be subjected to severe criticism and that they will not be entrusted with the leadership of party work.”
What safeguarded these “leaders” from criticism all this time? How did they come to be “entrusted” with leadership in the first place? Who is really responsible? On these as on all other questions, there is only silence from the Kremlin and all the hired and voluntary apologists of Stalin and Roosevelt.
 
The Kremlin’s “Leaders” of Industry
The editors of Bolshevik, who speak only on Kremlin’s orders, return again and again to the impermissible state of affairs in the industrial “leadership.”
“There still remain not a few leaders,” they keep harping, “who do not understand the need of widening their knowledge and their horizons and who think that they can get by with common-places, hollow phrases and superficial administration. Such leaders must be reminded ... by communists that the party will not stand on ceremony in dealing with them. Babblers and ignoramuses who refuse to study modern technology, who refuse to penetrate into economy and production cannot remain at the head of plants, factories and railways: they are acting as a brake on our further development.”
The Kremlin which itself placed “babblers” and “ignoramuses” in charge of plants, factories and railways would have the world believe that the real trouble was this, that these same babblers and ignoramuses “refused” to study (modern technology!) and proved themselves incapable of “penetrating” (into production and economy!); and that they must now be reminded of this by “communists.” Beneath contempt are those people who are trying today to embellish such self-confessed bankrupts and criminals, and their “horizons.”
Having presented this self-indictment, the editors of Bolshevik conclude:
“People who are incapable of living things, people who have broken away from the masses, who do not penetrate in essence into industrial and party work, who refuse to broaden their political and technico-economical knowledge and their horizons will be removed from party leadership as a result of the elections. Communists will elect to their leading organs people who understand the political line of the party and are capable of realizing it in practice.” (idem, page 9)
The turn-over in the “leadership” of the primary party organizations (which are entrusted with the direction of the country’s economic life) assumed fantastic proportions long before Stalin had issued his orders for the mass purge.
Thus, according to the Bolshevik:
“During the year 1940 in Kalinin oblast (province) 645 secretaries of primary organizations had to be relieved; and in the Ivanovstk oblast there were 665 replacements. Many of them turned out to be worthless, poorly prepared for leadership and incapable of coping with their duties.” (idem, page 9)
If such conditions prevailed in relatively unimportant regions as Kalinin and Ivanovsk, what must have been the situation in the key areas?
The collapse of the technical and administrative apparatus and the extent of the purge can be gauged by the warning to the top layers of the bureaucracy that they must supervise the removal of the bankrupts and the appointment of new “leaders.”
“Higher party organs—the district committees, the city committees, the oblast (province) committees of the party,” instructs the leading editorial in the Bolshevik, “must provide a day-to-day direction of the elections of party organs, and assist the primary party units in ridding themselves of worthless, weak and spineless workers, babblers and ignoramuses; they must advance to leadership people who are unswervingly devoted to the cause of the party of Lenin-Stalin.”
 
Stalin’s Policies Assured Hitler’s Successes
It should be borne in mind that the Kremlin’s implacable censorship succeeded in hiding the true conditions from the masses inside and outside the USSR. But Hitler and his General Staff were fully informed. They struck at the Soviet Union while the country’s economy was being disrupted internally and while the bureaucracy was once again devouring its own ranks. What more propitious circumstances could the enemy have asked for?
The conclusion is indisputable: Hitler and Hitler done gained from his pact with Stalin. Over and above the fact that Hitler protected his rear in the initial phases of war, isolated the USSR, and assured himself of the broadest possible military arena from which to launch his attack, he obtained through this pact not only political support but also aid from the Kremlin in the shape of foodstuffs, raw materials, oil, et cetera. While Soviet economy was declining, enormous quantities of these vital materials were being pumped by Stalin into Germany. As a matter of fact, the Kremlin has reiterated time and again that it had fulfilled to the letter all its obligations to the erstwhile ally.
It can be said without any fear of exaggeration that Stalin’s policies served only to guarantee all the advantages to Hitler. This was the case before and during the Stalin-Hitler pact. The very same thing is true today, when Stalin’s policies, translated to the military arena, have brought the USSR nothing but defeat after defeat.
Stalin’s bureaucratic apparatus had cracked on the eve of the invasion. The war has acted to speed up this process of disintegration. Every defeat recalls more and more sharply to the minds of the Soviet masses the fact that the military reverses are inextricably bound up with the entire previous course of the Kremlin, above all the monstrous purges which beheaded the Red Army and Soviet economy. To remain in power Stalin must at all costs restore his waning prestige. He can hope to refurbish his prestige only from the outside. He has now found new apologists in the ranks of the “democratic” imperialist bourgeoisie and their liberal camp-followers. They are crawling out of their skins to perform this service for the Kremlin. But they cannot and will not succeed. Stalin’s own admissions give the lie direct to the claims that his purges and his regime had “strengthened” the defensive power of the USSR.
 



During the first World War the social democrats tried to justify their support of the imperialist war by ascribing their false position to Marx and Engels. The Stalinists in repeating today the treachery of the Second International are resorting to a falsification of Lenin’s teachings.
In August 1916, Lenin reviewed a pamphlet by Junius, i.e., Rosa Luxemburg; and in the course of this review he criticized certain errors contained in her pamphlet. Extracts from Lenin’s review have been reprinted, with an “introduction” by Robert Minor, in the October 1941 issue of The Communist, the “theoretical” organ of the American Stalinists, who, as is well known, are maintaining the thesis that the present war began as an imperialist war, but has been transformed into a national war. They have seized upon Lenin’s review because in it he deals with the theoretical possibility of all sorts of transformations, including the transformation of imperialist war into a national war.
In the Daily Worker, the Stalinists do not attempt to justify their position on the war by anything but accepted social-patriotic arguments. However, when Stalinist rank and file members or sympathizers begin to question the correctness of the Stalinist war line, they are referred to the article in The Communist, and in particular to Minor’s introduction, for the “Leninist” answer to their doubts and questions.
 
Lenin on Junius’ Error
The central passage from Lenin’s article on which the Stalinists erect their fabrication reads as follows:
“It is highly improbable that this imperialist war of 1914–1916 will be transformed into a national war ... Nevertheless, it cannot be maintained that such a transformation is impossible: if the European proletariat were to remain impotent for another twenty years, if the present war were to end in victories similar to those achieved by Napoleon, in the subjugation of a number of viable national states; if imperialism outside of Europe (primarily American and Japanese) were to remain in power for another twenty years without transition to socialism, say, as a result of a Japanese-American war, then a great national war in Europe would be possible.” (Lenin’s Collected Works, Third Russian Edition, vol. XIX, p. 182)
Before we show how the Stalinists fraudulently utilize this quotation, it is necessary to explain why Lenin discussed in 1916 this question of the theoretical possibility of all sorts of transformations.
 
The Question of Self-Determination
One of the central planks in the program of Bolshevism, is the support of national wars and the advocacy of self-determination for all oppressed nationalities. This Leninist position played a crucial role in the triumph of the Russian revolution; and it is destined to play an equally important role in the struggle for world socialism.
During the last war, a group of German, Polish, and Russian internationalists who opposed the imperialist war held an erroneous position on the question of self-determination and national wars. The theoretical basis for their position was the contention that under imperialism, national wars were “impossible.” This premise was written into the program adopted by them (Thesis No. 5 of the International Group adopted by Luxemburg, Mehring, Radek and others). Lenin pointed out that this position was inconsistent with the Marxist method. In October 1916, in a letter to N.D. Kiknadze, Lenin explained why he dealt with this issue as follows:
 
Possibilities and Facts
“The discussion concerning ‘possibilities’ was in my opinion introduced incorrectly from the standpoint of theory by Radek into thesis 5 of the International Group. Marxism takes its stand on the soil of facts, and not of possibilities, Marxism must accept as the premises for its politics only clearly and incontestably demonstrable facts. That’s what we do in our resolution. When in its place people proffer me an ‘impossibility’, I reply: this is incorrect, non-Marxist, banal. All sorts of transformations are possible. And I adduce an historical fact (the wars of 1792–1815). I adduce for the sake of illustration something similar to it at the present time (under the conditions of a development backwards).
“In my opinion you are confusing the possible (and I did not begin the discussion on this point) with the actual, when you express the opinion that the admission of a possibility permits one to alter one’s policy. This is the height of illogical reasoning. I admit the possibility that social democrat (Marxist) can be transformed into a bourgeois, and vise versa. This is an incontestable truth. But does it follow from this that I would now accept a certain bourgeois, say, Plekhanov as a social democrat (Marxist)? No, it does not follow. But what about the possibility? Let us wait until it becomes transformed into reality. That is all there is to it. Precisely from the standpoint of ‘methodology’ (about which you write) it is necessary to differentiate between the possible and the actual. All sorts of transformations are possible, even that of a fool into a wise man ... but actually such transformations are very rare. And because of the mere ‘possibility’ of such a transformation, I shall not cease considering a fool as a fool.” (Lenin’s Collected Works, Third Russian Edition, pp. 237–238)
In 1941 Robert Minor brazenly declares that: “in this article Lenin, with startling accuracy, sketched the possibilities and even foretold as probable a great national war in Europe.” (Communist, October 1941, p. 880)
 
Minor’s Distortions
“The reader,” continues Minor, “will see what the conditions were, as forecast by Lenin. Among them are: If the war of 1914–18 were to be concluded in such a way that ‘the proletariat of Europe proved to be powerless for some twenty years,’ and if that war were to result in ‘victories of the type of Napoleon’s and the enslavement of a number of vital national states’, if ‘extra-European imperialism’ held out for twenty years, and if there should come ... a victorious revolution in Russia. If these conditions were to come about, said Lenin, a ‘great national war’ – i.e., a just war in defense of national independence, would be possible.” (idem)
In other words, the Stalinist falsification consists not only in claiming that all of Lenin’s “conditions” had been fulfilled, but in adding, as Minor does, the successful accomplishment of the Russian revolution as one of the necessary conditions for the transformation of the imperialist war into a national war!
As every school child knows, the first imperialist war did not terminate in “victories of the type of Napoleon’s.” Nor did he European proletariat remain “impotent.” On the contrary, the Russian workers, the vanguard of the European working class, accomplished under the leadership of Lenin and Trotsky the first victorious proletarian revolution and established the workers’ state in one-sixth of the world. This victory opened, as Lenin pointed out, a new epoch in world history. Instead of retrogressing, society moved forward after the imperialist war of 1914–18.
It is by such brazen falsification of history that the Stalinists try to turn Lenin’s “possibility” not only into a “prediction” but into reality!
 
Applied to Present War
If one were to apply to the present war, the conditions set down by Lenin for the transformation of the imperialist war of 1914–1916 into a national war, one would then have to make the following “provisions”: 1) not only would the European and world proletariat have to remain impotent “for another twenty years” but also the imperialists would first have to destroy the Soviet Union; 2) the second World War would have to terminate in victories of “the type of Napoleon’s”; and “extra-European imperialism” would have survive for “another twenty years without a transition to socialism.” We readily grant that this is not impossible. But this is as yet a far cry from the existing objective situation.
The Soviet Union still stands, despite the ruinous leadership and policies of Stalinism. The second World War far from having terminated in “Napoleonic victories” for either side, holds out the immediate prospects of a prolonged stalemate. The prospects of Japanese imperialism, not to mention the German or Italian variety, are none too bright despite the initial victories. World imperialism as a whole is in the grip of its greatest crisis. The European – including the Soviet – working class has yet to say its last word.
It is in these conditions that the Stalinists are advising the working class – the advanced class in modern society – to turn its face not to the future but to the past, in other words, to capitulate without a struggle. This has nothing in common with Marxism and Leninism. We repeat what Lenin said to Kiknadze, “What about the possibility? Let us wait until it becomes transformed into reality.” And until then? Until then we continue to base our policies not on “possibilities” but on reality.
 



The Soviet Power
by Hewlett Johnson, Dean of Canterbury
Modern Age Books, New York, XVII, 352 pp., 35 cents
(Special Edition for Soviet Russia Today)
The Very Reverend Hewlett Johnson, Dean of Canterbury, author of The Soviet Power, introduces himself to the reader as a “Friend of the Soviet Union,” a “progressive,” a champion of “essential truth,” “morality” and “science.” He worships the “scientific mind”; enjoys only the company of men to whom “truth (is) sacred and whose assertions are capable of concrete verification.”
These credentials together with an autobiography are presented in order to establish that he evolved, so to speak, organically towards admiration and concern for a “a great experiment in the new order of society.”
It goes without saying that to speak out, especially today, in favor of the Soviet Union is far more praiseworthy than to support Hitler, Churchill or Roosevelt. But the whole point is that this Dean is a supporter and friend of the Kremlin and the GPU and not of the October revolution. He supports Stalin and Churchill and Roosevelt. He belongs to the gifted and prolific tribe of European theologians who are past-masters at reconciling, in the interests of reaction, anything in the universe: they reconcile religion and science, communism and Fascism, Christ and Stalin, English hypocrisy with an appearance of rectitude, sincerity, humanism, and so on.
His sympathy for the Soviet Union, declares Mr. Johnson, flows solely from the highest considerations of morality. He scorns capitalism on moral grounds: “Our system lacks a moral basis.” Conversely, he is full of sympathy toward the Soviet Union: “It is the moral impulse of the new order ... which constitutes the greatest attraction and presents the widest appeal.” No doubt it is purely on moral grounds that he wants an alliance between Stalin, Churchill and Roosevelt. Let us follow this latter-day Tartuffe from Canterbury through all of his grimaces and posturings.
Not that he is uncritical of the conditions in the Soviet Union. God forbid! “There is need,” he admonishes, “to guard against a too rosy and optimistic view of life in the Soviet Union.” “I have seen and heard things,” he confesses, “which have shocked and disturbed me.” If he eschews criticism, it is solely because involved are “a hundred minor points” and “chiefly because other writers have already (and with over-emphasis) done the task for me.” The Dean has been thus spared a great deal of bother, if not embarrassment.
Furthermore, “Russia has inherited,” he explains, “an evil tradition not to be eradicated in a day.” If he himself has witnessed and heard shocking and disturbing things – no matter, he can keep mum. Others have “over-emphasized” – and besides, as he says, “I have heard and learned and seen many more (things) which enthuse and encourage me.” As the Russian peasants say: If you don’t touch it, it won’t stink.
 
Hear Not, See Not, Tell Not
Is there a bureaucracy in the Soviet Union? Mr. Johnson, in the name of Jesus, vows that not even a vestige of a privileged caste exists there. “There is no closed hierarchy in the Soviet Union.”
What about the GPU? Didn’t he hear about the Moscow Frame-up Trials?
The Dean cannot very well play the innocent here. And so, through one of those remarkable pronouncements, which distinguish the editorials in Pravda, he disposes of the business wholesale:
“The extensive spy system of earlier days (which is still unfortunately to a certain extent proceeding), the secret police, secret courts, and political executions were not inherent in Sovietdom: they were a hangover from the days of Tsardom.”
In other words Tsardom, say, from Ivan the Terrible to Nicholas the Bloody, is really to blame for Stalin’s crimes. Lest some fail to understand such an explanation he offers another:
“Russia is young. Literally and physically the Russia that matters today is young ... The Russian masses may be... at times even thoroughly cruel like the young.”
Elsewhere in the book, while discussing the natural resources of the Union, he quotes Professor Tyrrell, who refers to the Moscow Frame-up Trials and the purges as “the present lamentable phase of internal dissension.” “Those of us,” sighs the Dean, “who believe in absolute values will never be satisfied until the violation of these values ceases.” The priest, confronted with the crimes of the rulers, piously sighs for a better world – and saves himself from the painful and risky duty of indicting the criminals.
The author toured Russia, visiting “five Soviet Republics and several great Soviet towns.” He wandered on foot all by himself “many long hours on many occasions and entirely alone.” His wanderings took him “into all parts of the various towns and villages and at all hours of day and night.” He thus speaks with the authority of an eye witness. To be sure, he hardly dwells on his actual observations and experiences, especially in the dead of night. But by way of compensation, he scatters statistics and charts in all directions.
Least fraudulent is that section of his book which deals with the economic successes of the Soviet Union – which the Dean, incidentally, invites the reader to skip! The Dean’s data are false data, supplied to all tourists and “Friends” by Moscow. Nonetheless reflected in these falsified statistics are the colossal achievements of the Soviet masses, made possible only by the conquests of October. These successes are undeniable. Equally undeniable is the fact that they were attained against and despite the fatal regime of Stalinism, which has usurped the credit for them just as it has usurped the banner of the October revolution.
To the Dean, however, the Kremlin bureaucracy and the Soviet Union are one and the same thing. He writes precisely in glorification of Stalin’s regime, underwriting all of its lies.
 
A Pious Lie Against Trotskyism
No book on Russia is acceptable to the Kremlin unless it contains a slander against Trotsky and Trotskyism. The Dean obliges by reviving an old falsehood, that Trotsky, the real sponsor of planning and industrialization, obstructed “the scheme tooth and nail.”
As a matter of recorded fact, it was Stalin who opposed the plan and sneered, prior to 1929, at such projects as the building of the Dnieprostroi electric plant, claiming that it would be as superfluous as a gramophone to a moujik. It was Stalin who launched a campaign denouncing the Trotskyists as “super-industrialists”; and when forced to adopt the Trotskyist program of planning, he not only distorted the plan itself but, as is his custom, laid his own previous crimes at the door of his opponents. These statements are easily capable of the “concrete verification” which the Dean presumably demands. They are recorded in the party documents and minutes of that period.
No book is acceptable to the Kremlin unless it lies about the position of women. What has remained of the conquests of October so far as women are concerned? To believe Mr. Johnson the position of women in the Soviet Union is as enviable today as it was under Lenin. They are accepted into heavy industry. They have the greatest freedom. “A woman is free to have as many children as she likes.” As “many” but not as few as she likes. In other words, the same “freedom” as is afforded her by the Catholic Church. (“Abortion was permitted as a temporary measure ... and it was abolished ...in 1936 after a prolonged public discussion.” The protestant Dean refrains from mentioning the fact that so far as the public was concerned, it universally opposed the anti-abortion and anti-Birth Control Ukase of the Kremlin.) The lot of womanhood cannot be considered apart from those conditions in which workers and children find themselves. That is why we center our review precisely around these aspects of Soviet life under Stalin.
No book is acceptable to the Kremlin unless it lies about the workers – about their standard of living, their wages, their working conditions, etc.
As concerns the workers, the Dean literally bristles with statistics. He never tires of demonstrating – on paper – how prices fall, wages rise, social amenities increase, and the standard of living advances along with the increased consumption of goods. On page 177 there is a chart illustrating how prices have dropped and wages have risen steadily and consistently from 1934 to 1937. If the Dean refrains from adducing a few charts and figures since 1937 and especially since 1939, it is because commodity prices have sky-rocketed in that period 50 to 100 percent and more, while the wages were slashed time and again.
However, lies have a logic of their own. The more Stalin, and his apologists, are compelled to lie, all the more graphically is truth revealed.
 
The Land of Milk and Honey
The Dean doubtless believes – as does the Daily Worker – that he is doing Stalin a service by painting up the regime, especially in such chapters as The New Horizons, and The Open Gateway. In another chapter, The Democracy of the Workshop, he glorifies the conditions in Soviet factories; sings paeans to the seven-hour day and the leisure and opportunities afforded to the workers. Under Stalin, announces the Dean, the worker “enjoys a new freedom in the workshop.” “The democracy of the workshop is the bulwark of Soviet liberty, its nature and value have been largely overlooked.” This was true under Lenin but this bulwark of workers’ democracy was long ago destroyed by Stalin.
The seven-hour day, five-day week was introduced by the bureaucracy as a political measure in 1927, the year when the struggle against the Left Opposition – Trotskyists – reached its climax. To the mass of the Soviet workers it remained a seven-hour day in name only.
On June 26, 1940, Stalin abolished that 35-hour week and instituted the 48-hour week, i.e., replaced one legal fiction by another. Soviet workers actually work much longer hours. The June 26 ukase not only lengthens the “legal” hours of the working day, and cuts wages, but also makes it a criminal offense for anyone to quit his job. The penalty for “self-willed departure” is the GPU dungeon. Skipping a day’s work or tardiness, is punishable by penal-labor terms of two. to four months, plus a fine up to 25% of the wages.
Here is the law:
“Article 5. Workers and employees who. arbitrarily leave state, cooperative and public enterprises and/or institutions are remitted to court and by sentence of People’s Judges incarcerated in prisons for a term of two to-four months. For stopping or skipping work without serious reason workers and employees of state, cooperative and public enterprises andjor institutions are remitted to court and sentenced by People’s Judges to terms up to six months of penal labor at place of employment, and up to 25 percent of their wages (are) withheld.” – Text of the June 26, 1940, Ukase
If for any reason a worker turns out defective foods, he goes to jail (Ukase of July 10, 1940).
For taking away so much as a nail, a worker is guilty of theft and goes to jail. “Petty theft, regardless of the amount, committed in institutions and enterprises, is punishable by a term of one year in jail.” – Ukase of August 10, 1940,
Any accident in a factory can come under the head of “hooliganism” and carries with it a jail sentence.
“A worker Gavrilov, while dismantling a kiln in the Negin factory in Leningrad, dropped a plank which fell on some frames lying, on the floor. Several panes of glass were broken, Gavrilov was arrested and brought to court on the charge of hooliganism.” – Pravda, October 12, 1940
The Ukase of October 19, 1940, extended the compulsory labor laws to the administrative and technical staffs of Soviet institutions, thus in effect converting them into wardens, turnkeys and trustees of these virtual prisons.
Such are the real conditions in the factories under Stalin. The Daily Worker has not dared to publish a single one of these Ukases. No foreign correspondent was permitted to cable the text of these laws from Moscow.
Here is how the Reverend disposes of the June laws in a footnote:
“In August 1940, the hours of labor have been increased but now the times are serious ... and ... workers are prepared to give some of their treasured leisure to produce the sinews of war and make impregnable the Socialist Soviet Republic.” (p. 237).
Not a word about the ferociously repressive aspects of this legislation. And for very good reasons. Even the most brazen apologist for Stalinism cannot unload everything on the war danger. Furthermore even the most gullible follower of the Kremlin must ask himself: If conditions were as wonderful as the Dean – and the Daily Worker – claim, why was such legislation necessary? What must have beta the real and terrible conditions up to now, if such savage laws have to be passed today? Just how is the Soviet Union strengthened by reducing workers to the status of prison labor? So the Dean says nothing: If you don’t touch it, it won’t stink.
Modern large-scale industry, let alone planned economy, cannot be operated by prison labor. It is impossible to run large-scale plants under a prison administration. By his latest laws, Stalin has gravely weakened the defensive power of the Soviet Union. Every thinking worker understands this. It is well to ponder in this connection the following incautious words of this preacher-apologist of Stalinism:
“Discipline imposed from above and involved in an operation in which the worker is in no sense a partner acts as a clamp upon the mind. It thwarts initiative,” continues the Dean. “Resentment smoulders beneath the surface only awaiting some new grievance to burst into flames. A real sense of injustice always present, even if subconsciously, leads to a deep-rooted hostility and suspicion, erecting barriers ... in its ultimate manifestation this leads to ... revolution.”
We subscribe wholeheartedly to these words with one reservation – in addition to the bosses in England and elsewhere, we also address them to the parasites in the Kremlin whom the Dean exempts. The Soviet Union can be strengthened only by restoring workers’ democracy in factories, in trade unions, in the schools, in the Army, in the Soviets, etc. Only a political revolution against the Stalinist bureaucracy can restore workers’ democracy.
 
The Plight of the Youth
According to the Dean, he was brought closest to the Kremlin by the concern and love for children which they share in common. We, too, place the utmost importance upon the fate of children and the youth. That is why we spare no efforts in exposing the crimes of Stalinism, which is the deadliest enemy of the youth.
Stalin stands in mortal fear of the youth. We Trotskyists have said for years that the Komsomols (the Russian YCL) was liquidated politically because Stalin was afraid it would develop into a political party against him. The Dean of Canterbury himself now corroborates this. As the first proof of Stalin’s love of democracy, he presents the fact that Stalin removed “political power from the Komsomols – i.e., from the Young Communist League – when they were challenging the Party itself as an organ of political power.” (p.306).
If this is how a “friend” of the Soviet youth speaks, what would an enemy say?
There is internal evidence that this English-bred enemy of the youth – who gloats over its political expropriation – did most of his visiting in the Soviet Union in 1937, the year which marks the apogee of Stalin’s brief public career as the world’s greatest humanist and lover of youth.
In 1937, when Stalin was being photographed kissing babies and painted walking in parks surrounded by happy children, etc., the Dean first stated that he was particularly impressed by the work being done for the children in Russia.
“For thirty years I have urged,” he said at the time, “that every child should be given the utmost opportunity for development for his or her powers ... This is the debt we owe to children ... Here I see the desire and the will that it shall be done more thoroughly perhaps, than any other part of the world.” (Moscow News, Nov. 7, 1937)
In writing his book two years later, this hypocrite from Canterbury claims that he has remained true to his life-time endeavor. “What impressed me most in Soviet Russia,” he vows, “was not her factories and material statistics but her children.”
Let every thinking worker read what he says about the meaning and importance of equal opportunity and free education, and then let him compare this with the Ukases of October 2, 1940 – which the Daily Worker has not dared to print. Stalin has not only abolished free education for the children of workers and peasants but has drafted children and adolescents from 14 to 17 into industry.
Stalin’s program, insists the liar from Canterbury, is “to give every man, woman and child ... equal education in childhood and youth.” Further, “Equal opportunity for education is provided universally, the school-leaving age is in process of being raised to seventeen and payment is made to students at universities.” (p. 64).
He devotes two special chapters, The New Horizons and The Open Gateway, to this very important conquest of the October revolution – the right to Education –, sealed by law under Lenin [1], “guaranteed” by the Stalinist Constitution, and now abolished without even consulting the Supreme Council of the USSR, the only body allegedly empowered to amend the Constitution.
“The ideal held out to a child differs entirely from that still too common here (England) – ‘Word hard and get on’.” (p. 195)
“Education from first to last is provided for all without monetary payments, from the excellently equipped nursery-schools right up to the university course.” (p. 185)
“There is no financial difficulty which hinders a ... student from entering the university or institute for higher education.” (p. 207)
“Technical institutes await children (of workers) free of charge.” (p. 237)
“What has the Soviet Union done for its youth and what is it doing? ... On his seventeenth birthday and not before, he can enter industry.” (p. 205)
And so forth and so on.
He solemnly declares:
“By 1940 education for children of eight to fifteen will be compulsory throughout the Union, from the Arctic to the desert steppes. By the same date education in all towns, industrial settlements, and rural centers will be compulsory from eight to eighteen.” (p. 195)
Now, let us confront this liar with facts:
“The fees for college are 400 roubles a year in Union Republic capitals, 300 rubles in other cities; and 500 rubles for art, theatre and music schools. For the 8th, 9th, and 10th grades the fee is 200 rubles in the capitals, 150 in other cities.” (Soviet Russia Today, January, 1941)
Thus education even in grades equivalent to those of the American public schools is no longer free. Correspondence courses must likewise be paid for at the rate of one-half of the respective school fees.
On December 1, 1940, more than 600,000 Soviet children and adolescents from fourteen to seventeen were drafted into industry. By February 1941, 200,000 more were drafted. In the euphemistic language of the Daily Worker, they are attending “industrial training schools” which will “graduate workers for – first and foremost – the coal mining, ore mining, metallurgical and oil industries, and the building trades.” The latest news from Moscow is that children are also being “graduated” for the timber industry, i.e., the lumber camps.
“In this way,” continues the Daily Worker, “in 1941 the ... schools will be able to give socialist industry approximately 800,000 workers.” (Daily Worker, February 7, 1941)
The term “industrial training schools” is nothing but a revolting cover for the legalization of child labor in the Soviet Union. The conditions in industry have become so intolerable under Stalin that peasants, to say nothing of adult city-dwellers, refuse to enter the jail-factories. This has been openly admitted by the Kremlin. In his speech on the Twenty-Third Anniversary of the October Revolution, Kalinin said:
“The reserves of labor power in the cities have been exhausted, and the influx from the villages has ceased” (Izvestia, November 7, 1940)
 
Who Defends the Soviet Union?
Apart from other vital considerations, we oppose child labor because modern large-scale industry cannot be operated by children. Stalinism is now taking a terrible toll of the most precious young lives, the reservoir of the revolution. Instead of being strengthened the defensive power of the Soviet Union is all the more weakened thereby.
These Draconic laws went into effect more than four months ago. The Reverend Mr. Johnson has not yet seen fit to add so much as a footnote to his text. It is not hard to guess how all of Stalin’s priests and professors, from Canterbury, England, or Cambridge, USA [2], will try to explain them away. They will invoke the war danger; they will cite the difference between 1939 (when the Stalin-Hitler pact was signed) and 1940–41 (when Hitler’s armies line the borders of the Soviet Union from the Arctic Ocean to the Black Sea), etc., etc. But no matter how these gentlemen squirm, they cannot evade the fact that these laws do not at all flow from the need to defend the Union but from the need to maintain the bureaucracy in power. The greatest danger threatening the Soviet Union comes not from the outside but from the inside. It is Stalinism.
If in Britain and the United States Stalin’s flunkeys try to explain away child labor as an unfortunate but indispensable measure of defense, then his flunkeys in Moscow hail it, on the contrary, as a great historic triumph. Free education, to believe Pravda, is not only unessential but it is a great evil. It demoralizes the pupils:
“Many of our students haven’t really appreciated the boons of higher education which they received without any exertion on their part.”
It demoralizes the parents as well:
“Free education has to a certain extent lowered the value of education in the eyes of a certain section of parents and students.” (Pravda, October 22, 1940)
Some of the Kremlin’s pen-prostitutes in America go so far as to declare that education itself is of no particular value:
“In the USSR one does not need to attend college to be an honored member of society.” (Soviet Russia Today, January 1941)
Every syllable uttered by these bureaucratic scoundrels breathes nothing but contempt for the workers whether in Russia, England or America. But these gentlemen and ladies will not find it easy to dupe the masses on such vital issues.
 
What Is Happening to the CPSU
Every thinking member of the American Communist Party should above all familiarize himself with what Mr. Hewlitt Johnson has to say about the position and role of the Communist Party in the Soviet Union.
The party, he writes, “is the tangible means by which primarily, workers feel and exercise their ownership of industry” (p.241).
Further,
“the Party exercises general supervision over the whole collective enterprise and maintains its standard. The Party is the inspiring, stimulating, regulating spirit of any enterprise.” (p. 242)
Again,
“Branches of cells of this Communist Party are found in all factories, and complete consultation takes place between the Party and the management of all matters affecting the general direction of the factory and the well-being of the workers.” (p. 243)
We are willing to grant to any honest worker who still follows the Stalinists that the Dean is telling the truth about the real position and function of the party in the Soviet Union. If he believes this, then he has all the more reason to demand from Earl Browder and the Daily Worker an answer to the following questions:
Why has the Daily Worker failed to print a single word about the Eighteenth Party Conference since the publication of the call on December 20, 1940?
Walter Duranty writes in the New York Times that very important changes in the role of the party in all spheres of Soviet life are not only being contemplated but will actually be ratified on February 15 when the Conference convenes in Moscow. Is that true?
If it is, why is the Daily Worker silent on so important a subject?
Why does Soviet Russia Today (February 1941 issue) delete Duranty’s reference to the party while reprinting practically the whole of Duranty’s first dispatch?
What are they trying to hide from the members of the Communist Party in the United States?
The Russian Party has been shoved aside and shorn of any real voice, power or leadership in the vital spheres of Soviet life, in the economy, in the Red Army, in the government, etc. Why?

Very few survivors remain of the once vast and gullible horde of “Friends of the Soviet Union.” Most of Stalin’s intellectual “giants” have been exposed for what they are – venal agents of the GPU. The Kremlin can find today no figure more imposing than that of a sycophantic priest to serve its ends.
The ostensible purpose of the book “is to promote a “better understanding” between the Soviet Union, Great Britain, and the United States. It is really intended, however, to bolster up the morale of what remains of the Stalinist liberal periphery and of the membership itself – after the effects of the purges, the Frame-up Trials, the Stalin-Hitler pact, Finnish invasion and, above all, the most recent decrees, purges and developments in the Soviet Union. That is why the Dean’s book is being promoted so frantically.
If anyone in the Soviet Union dared to quote from this book, he or she would have to finish the quotation before a GPU firing squad. When the Kremlin wakes up to the realization of just how “outdated” the Dean’s book really is, and what “footnotes” it really requires, the current edition will be withdrawn from the market, and a few ears in the offices on Thirteenth Street will be pinned back for “lack, of vigilance.” Meanwhile, we express the hope that workers will really read this book and consider all the lies in it – in the light of what is now happening in the Soviet Union.

Footnotes
1. Provision for education in the Program of the Communist Party adopted March, 1919:
“1) Free and compulsory general and poiytechnical education for all children of both sexes up to the age of 17 ...
“4) All students must be supplied with food, clothing, footwear, text books, and all other school accessories at the expense of the state.”
2. “Professor” H.W.L. Dana, Reverend F. Hastings Smythe (a former student of the Dean of Canterbury), Professor Dirk-Struik of M.I.T., et al. – a few of the super-salesmen of the Dean’s book.
 




It was not Stalin who delivered the main report to the Eighteenth Party Conference which convened in the Kremlin on February 16th. The main reporter was a petty underling, one Georgi Malenkov, who is not even a prominent member of the Political Buro but merely one of the secretaries of the Central Committee. This procedure is without precedent in the history of political parties in general and of the Stalinist Party Conferences in particular.
Not that silence on Stalin’s part is in and of itself unprecedented. Far from it. In every critical situation on the world arena (China 1925–1927, Germany 1933, Spain 1931–37, etcetera) this “Father of the Peoples” – whose whole political wisdom lies in evading, temporizing and then betraying – has withdrawn to the sidelines to suck his pipe in silence. Indeed, it can be said without any fear of exaggeration that the gravity of any given crisis may be partly gauged by the duration of Stalin’s silences.
But this is the first time that the Kremlin Dictator has publicly abdicated his leading role in a Party Conference. “The attention of the whole party,” cynically writes Pravda, “and all the Soviet people centers on the Conference.” (Daily Worker, February 18). And yet a nonentity takes the floor on the main business before this all-important Conference, while the “General Secretary” sits mum on the Presidium! Why?
The crisis in the Soviet Union must be very grave indeed if Stalin chooses not to talk. Malenkov’s speech alone bears this out to the hilt.
Still more, the crisis is so grave that Stalin is no longer able to rule through the party, as the avowed dominant force in Soviet life. The party has been shoved aside. Any nonentity may now address it with the voice of authority. Again, this is corroborated by Malenkov’s speech and by – Stalin’s silence.
The crisis of the Soviet economy, the complete breakdown of the Third Stalinist Five-Year plan has now been officially acknowledged through the mouth of Malenkov.
In his speech he admitted that there was a “lag” in “several key industries”; that output had decreased “in such industries as building material and lumber”; that production costs have increased, and therefore the productivity of labor has fallen, in such industries as “oil, paper and timber.” (N.Y. Times, Feb. 17) There is a “backwardness,” declared Malenkov, in “coal, oil and textile industries in the Urals, the Don, Kharkoff, Gorki, Yaroslav, Stalingrad, and Dniepropetrovsk districts.” If the editors of the Daily Worker or the Dean of Canterbury were asked to call the roll of the most important industrial areas of the Union, they would have to repeat Malenkov’s list of backward areas.
 
“Reign Of Dirt”
In Soviet “enterprises, shops, depots, harbor and railroad works” there was, according to the same Malenkov, a “reign of dirt.” Many a scoundrel sometimes utters the truth, even if unintentionally. We accent this characterization of Stalin’s rule: The Reign of Dirt!
Pravda, in commenting on Malenkov’s speech wrote: “In eight industrial People’s Commissariats 33,000 machine tools stood idle. At 7,629 enterprises, 170,000 electric motors were not mounted. The cement industry last year worked only at 64 percent of its capacity.” (Daily Worker, February 18)
Malenkov denounced so many People’s Commissariats and Commissars as to make it obvious, in this case as in all others, that “many” really means all.
As if to prove this, he referred in his speech to the breakdown of the railways and of water transport. They have “failed to keep up to schedule in loadings of ores, petroleum, wheat, salt, wood and coal.” (N.Y. Times, February 17)
 
Famine in Siberia
Walter Duranty was permitted by the Moscow censors to cable news of serious food shortages, i.e. famine in Siberia, one of the great granaries of the Soviet Union, due to the breakdown of transport.
“The Russians,” wrote Duranty, “also need something else for their great Siberian ‘empire,’ food. It is all a matter of transportation.” (N.Y. Times, Feb. 13)
Even the Daily Worker, which was brazen enough to represent Malenkov’s report as a picture of glowing progress, had to admit that he “spoke mainly of shortcomings.” Small wonder, that Stalin preferred, apart from all other considerations, not to have these “shortcomings” entered into public record under his own name. The grave crisis in Soviet economy is blamed, as usual, on scapegoats. “A violent attack on top-heavy bureaucracy and buck-passing, blamed for slowing down Soviet industrial output was delivered before Joseph Stalin.” (N.Y. Times, Feb. 17)
The world thus learns that a vast purge of the party has been and is in progress. The party apparatus is “top-heavy.” Party functionaries are being purged as “bureaucrats,” “armchair administrators,” “buck-passers,” “chatterboxes,” etc. etc.
On February 15 the Daily Worker unwittingly announced that not less than one-fifth of the incumbent Central Committee would be lopped off at this Conference, “The All Union Conference,” reads the dispatch from Moscow, “has the special right of replacing individual members of the Central Committee ... though the number so replaced must not exceed one-fifth of the total number.” (Daily Worker, Feb. 16)
To replace the victims, Malenkov demanded “hard-headed” executives and called for “boldly promoting new capable workers with initiative.” In 1939 at the last Party Congress Stalin made a pledge to the Party that no more mass purges would take place. All the more reason for keeping quiet in 1941.
But in addition to being purged the party has been divested of authority not only in the Army, but in the sphere of economy.
Malenkov demanded, among other measures, “undivided and unchallenged authority for industrial managers and foremen.” And to make doubly certain that this authority is not infringed upon, he announced as “contemplated” the following organizational “reform”: In all “industrialized cities, districts and republics” the City and District Party Committees, that is the bureaucratic tops, will henceforth appoint special secretaries “to direct the party organizations of each industrial branch, and similarly ... in railway and water transport.” (Pravda, February 17)
In other words, Stalin’s G.P.U. will appoint special agents (”secretaries”) to enforce the new “law and order” to the letter.
If so much is admitted officially what must be the real situation in the Soviet Union?
Why has the Daily Worker carried no news at all of the pre-Conference “discussion”?
Why does the Daily Worker insist on lying about Malenkov’s report? Why does it claim that “every passing year sees an enormous increase in the gross industrial output”?
How could industrial output increase with “every passing year” under a top-heavy bureaucracy, under “armchair administrators,” “buck-passers” etc.?
No real defender of the Soviet Union would seek to cover up the crimes of Stalinism which are weakening the workers’ state literally with every passing hour. Every thinking worker must ask himself why the Stalinists in America are compelled to cover up G.P.U. lies and murders not only in Washington but in Moscow.
When the Daily Worker first printed the call for the Eighteenth Party Conference, it proudly announced that all Party organizations having more than 10,000 members would be represented by “one regular delegate per 10,000 Party members.” (Daily Worker, December 21, 1940)
The membership of the C.P.S.U. was officially given, in August 1940 as almost 2¼ million. Therefore, the number of “regular delegates” at this Conference could not be more than 225.
However Stalin made a “special” provision. The Central Committee (alias Stalin) “gave one additional regular mandate to 125 city committees ... to 30 Party organizations in railways and to 27 Party organizations in the ports, sea and river fleets.” (Daily Worker, December 21, 1940. Our emphasis)
The flimsy pretext under which Stalin violated – not for the first time! – his own statutes reads as follows: “In view of the fact that the main question before the Conference is the work of Party organizations in industry and transport therefore” it is permissible to appoint almost as many additional “regular mandates” as there might be “regular delegates.” If that is not packing Conference in accordance with he best “democratic” traditions, what is it?
 




Mr. Walter Duranty, Stalin’s publicity agent in the United States, continues to scoop the Daily Worker, “On February 15,” he writes, “begins the Eighteenth Party Conference which will rank in importance with any such previous meeting.”
All that the Daily Worker has printed on this important Conference is the announcement of the call last December 20! From all indications, the pre-Conference discussion is taking place in the columns of the New York Times.
Mr. Duranty boasts that he knows in advance that “this next conference will discuss, work out in detail and ratify a program of party control and cooperation in ALL BRANCHES OF SOVIET ENDEAVOR.” (N.Y. Times, January 29. My emphasis) No more, no less.
This statement is then clarified as follows:
“It has now been determined (by whom? where? when ? – J.G.W.) that control shall not mean interference or divided local authority but watchfulness to see that the orders of the central authority – and also production plans – are carried out and to help in carrying them out.”
If these words mean anything at all, they mean that the party’s role is henceforth to be, if not that of “watchdog,” then, at most, that of a “watchman” and a “helper.” Let us see just what the “program of party control and co-operation” amounts to in the Red Army, where things have gone beyond the point of discussion, elaboration, or ratification. In fact, the new “program” was already in force in the Red Army a month before the Conference call was issued. Complete political authority has been for months in the hands of the self-same commandeers who (as Comrade Pokras describes elsewhere in this issue) are invested with the power of life and death over their subordinates.
“On the commanders, the plenipotentiary leaders of the troops, has likewise fallen the whole burden of responsibility for the political work in the sections. This has still further raised,” insists Pravda, “the authority of commanders and has determined the direction of the party political work in the Red Army.” (Pravda, November 19, 1940) This was written more than two months before Duranty began writing his dispatches!
How much “role” does that leave for the party as such in the life of the Red Army?
Duranty pretends that there is still “the question of precisely what role the Communist party ... should play in army affairs.” (N.Y. Times, January 27)
Apparently, the role is that of a flea on a watchdog.
If any discussion took place this “adjustment.” as Duranty modestly calls it, it certainly was not on the pages of the Russian press. “The Army Bolsheviks have rallied as a single monolithic detachment, in closed ranks around the Central Committee of the C.P.S.U. Comrade Stalin ...” boasted Pravda on November 19, 1940.
Stalin will be surrounded at the Eighteenth Party Conference by his suite of Marshals, Generals etc. in addition to all the other “plenipotentiaries,” who will do the “ratifying,” and who have done the “rallying.”
The old formula used to read “rally around the party, the Central Committee and Comrade Stalin.” For the time being we reserve comment on the new formula, namely, “the Central Committee, Comrade Stalin.” Suffice it to call attention here to this noteworthy change, in connection with the new role of the officers.
Duranty does not lie when he says “It is the biggest thing in the U.S.S.R. today, this adjustment of the Communist party ... to the Red Army and, for that matter, to industry, too.” It certainly does loom bigger and bigger.
If the “adjustment” in the Army is any gauge, then the party’s role in industry will not be a major one. Stalin, when he takes the floor at the Conference, will undoubtedly clarify matters more fully than Duranty is permitted to. But it is possible to say in advance that Duranty’s formula of “watchfulness” comes close to summing up the program as regards the party.
Duranty even supplies the keynote of Stalin’s speech at the Conference, namely: “Stop Playing Politics!” “Work for National Progress!” Duranty himself assures us that “the Communists themselves are learning ... are working for national progress instead of just playing politics.” That sounds very authoritative. And no doubt it is.
In 1937, Stalin “taught the Communists” that they had become too preoccupied with economic successes and had forgotten all about politics. At the plenum of the Central committee he said at the time:
“It should be explained that economic successes themselves, their stability and duration wholly and fully depend on the successes of party organizational and party political work; that without this condition economic successes may prove to have been built on sand.”
And again:
“And he who thinks to separate economy from politics in our practical policy, to strengthen, economic work at the cost of belittling political work, or contrariwise, to strengthen, political work at the cost of belittling economic work, will inevitably find himself in a blind alley.” (Daily Worker, March 30, 1937)
In 1941, he is evidently preparing to instruct the party to forget all about politics. The formulas may alter but the conclusion remains the same: ‘In a blind alley.’
 



Free Europe, a fortnightly review of (so-called) international opinion, contains three articles on Soviet War Potential by Anatole Baikaloff. (Issues of Dec. 13th, 1940 and following). He takes up the three factors in war potential: the military, the industrial and the morale.
The peacetime strength of the Red Army is 2.5 million with 7 million trained reserves and 25 million total available manpower. But numbers alone mean little. Huge armies inadequately equipped, badly trained and led, are mere cannon-fodder. The Finnish War showed an insufficient soldier training. But the weakest point was the shortage of officers and their technical inefficiency. At the beginning of 1937 (official Soviet data) there were 46,500 officers of all ranks. 4,500 of these had served in the old imperial army; 26,000 were trained in Soviet military schools: 16,000 were promoted from the ranks after a short perfunctory training:. Only 15% of the colonels and generals had passed through military academies. These figures show an insufficiency of officers even for a peace-time army.
According to information of the French General Staff, the purge begun in May 1937 affected no less than 30,000 officers who were either shot, imprisoned or otherwise removed from the army. The higher ranks suffered the most. Here are those liquidated: 3 marshals out of 5; 13 army commanders out of 19; 65 corps commanders out of 85; 110 divisional commanders out of 180; 202 brigade commanders out of 406. Time has been too short to repair the damage of this massacre in the last two years. A major war would require 300 divisions and there are too few officers available. Very few are now able to work out strategic plans or tactics or to conduct operations. In the Finnish War the High Command directed operations most incompetently. Only the good fighting qualities of the ranks and their dogged tenacity averted a major disaster. Tactical successes were achieved only after securing the services of German experts. The Red Army could undertake large-scale operations against a first-class military power if the plan of operations were drawn up by foreign experts, but would the Allies spare the time and would the Kremlin deem it advisable?
The number of military machines at the disposal of the army are sufficient. On June 1, 1940, there were 30,000 airplanes including 18,000 first line bombers and fighters; 20,000 tanks of all sizes; several thousand armored cars; a sufficient number of field and heavy guns; a large fleet of trucks and lorries. But the troops are not familiar with the working of their equipment and not trained to handle them efficiently. They show rough and careless handling. Clothing and footwear are of very poor quality. Discipline suffered greatly from dual command. The political commissars interfered with purely military matters and undermined the authority of the commanding officers. The GPU is feared and hated by officers and men. Many were murdered by their own subordinates during the campaign. At the beginning of August 1940 these commissars were abolished. But the higher ranks were not affected by this reform. Stalin does not trust his officers and they are spied on now as before. Thus the action and initiative of the commanding officers is very limited. The Red Army is by no means a first class army.
Transport is the big Russian problem. The coefficient of traffic density was 1.13 in 1913. In 1938 it was 3.90 as against 1.08 in the US; 0.83 in England; 1.17 in Germany. Even during peacetime the railroads are considerably overloaded. They could not stand a war-strain and their breakdown would bring an industrial halt. There is a shortage of engines, trucks, carriages, rails. There are no good motor roads and road transport is insignificant. There are only 17.5 million horses in 1938 as against 35.8 in 1916. Russia lacks copper, zinc, tin, aluminum, lead and rubber. The weakest link is agriculture which hardly meets the low level of peace needs.
The factor of morale is worst of all. The workers and peasants are no better than serfs. The cost of living is going up and wages down. Youth are now deprived of education. According to the Soviet press itself, the new decrees cut short the studies of some 600,000 students. Pupils in secondary schools have to pay 200 rubles per year, in universities and technical schools 400 rubles. This rule was applied even to pupils and students in their last year. In some provincial universities and technical colleges 80% were obliged to quit and seek employment. Boys of 14 to 17 were conscripted for labor. After one year’s training they are obliged to work for four years anywhere they are sent. In short, Russia is a volcano ready for revolt.
J.W.
 



Foreign Affairs for January 1941 contains an informative article by Freda Utley entitled The Enigma of Soviet Production. This article is crammed with material on the impasse reached by the bureaucracy in Soviet economy.
Up to 1937 production in the USSR increased in spite of all the blunders but “since 1937 production in the basic industries has either been stagnant or has declined.” 1940 was the worst year since the famine of 1931–32. The Finnish War threw the transport system into utter chaos and set back the material conditions in Russia correspondingly.
The First Five-Year Plan completely failed to stick to the planned estimates in regard to labor and wages. The plan had called for a total investment of 86 billion rubles. Instead, it became 120 billions, inflation making up for mistakes and disproportions. The plan had called for an increase of 1.25 billions of rubles in note issues. But already in 1928 it was increased by 1.77 billions and in October 1932 it was greater by 4.6 billions. The plan had called for an increase of 100% in labor productivity (output per worker). The number of workers should have increased from 11.3 to 15.8 millions. But it actually went up to 22.8 millions. This means that 44% more workers than called for, produced less than the plan called for!
By the end of the First Five-Year Plan prices had reduced the value of the ruble to about 1/10 its old value in real wages. Rationing and the “closed distributors” tended to correct this somewhat. But these were abolished in 1935.
Despite the 10 billion rubles of investment In agricultural machinery, the grain crop in 1932 was still 26% below the pre-war level (69.6 million tons as against 94.1 in 1913). Industrial crops were worse off, being down 50%.
Livestock had been reduced by forced collectivization from 276 million head to 160 million. Only by 1937 did agriculture attain the pre-war level. At that time textiles lagged far behind the plan, production being little more than in 1913, despite the increase in population.
The best conditions existed in 1934–36. But then appeared the full effects of the wasteful bureaucratic “driving” to achieve records. The huge investments from 1929 to 1937 were largely wasted through neglect and overworking of the machinery. Since then we have witnessed the so-called “tightening of labor discipline;” in reality, blaming the workers for the condition of the machines caused by bureaucratic direction. Quantitatively the basic industries remained about the same in 1939 as in 1938. Steel and coke production even slumped. Oil was down. There was such a terrible drop in the production of iron, coal and steel in the last quarter of 1938 that it is very likely the workers had gone on a sitdown strike. Production was actually cut in half. The cry against so-called “shirkers” may very well represent a cry against strikers!
To show the conditions of the masses, Freda Utley (who came out of Russia in 1938 – she was a textile specialist) mentions that the output of shoes even by the plan will be only 1½ pair per person per year in 1942. And these don’t last more than one month. There is a tremendous shortage of clothing; people are in rags. The cost of staple foods is 15 times higher in 1937 than in 1914 whereas wages are only five times higher. When prices were increased for all foods except bread from 35% to 100% in 1940, bread-lines formed once again.
Collective farms receive from 1.1 to 1.5 rubles per pood of rye or about 9 kopecks per kilogram. Now the “official” price of bread (it is actually higher) is 1 ruble or 100 kopecks a kilogram in the state stores. This enormous bread tax and the 100% turnover tax on all manufactured goods creates peasant discontent and a chronic food shortage, which in turn causes a reduced productivity of labor. In 1935 Stalin made concessions to the peasants; they were permitted to own a little land, a garden, livestock, etc. This caused a rapid increase in cows, sheep, pigs, poultry and an intensive cultivation of vegetables. The food situation in the towns was considerably alleviated, but the collective farmers “virtually withdrew from the kolkhozes and were spending all their time working on their own land.” Hence in 1939, Stalin again withdrew these concessions and purged many kolkhoz managers who had allowed the peasants to take over a big part of the collective farm lands for private cultivation in return for a fixed rent in kind.
The peasants are unwilling to work on the collective farms because of the terrible mismanagement and the small return for their labor. At every opportunity they relapse into private cultivation. Thus by 1939 the private lot had lost its subsidiary character and in many cases had become the main source of income for the collective farmer. Stalin declared the private lots “illegal” once more in that year and compelled the peasants to sell their renewed livestock back to the collectives at one-tenth their market value. Since then there has again appeared an acute shortage of meat, butter, poultry, etc.
Now the bureaucracy has to turn either to Germany or the US for the machinery needed to replace the tools of production so rapidly worn out.
“It is doubtful,” concludes the author, “whether at this stage the Soviet Government could materially improve the conditions of the Russian workers and peasants except by such radical economic and political changes as would deprive Stalin and his bureaucracy of their power and material privileges. The rot in the social system has already gone too far ... Above all the liquidation of the trained personnel over the past ten years is a loss which cannot be replaced ... This method of (repressive) government can be successful only where there is no threat from abroad. A dictator who lacks popular support dare not risk a war in which weapons would be placed in the hands of the subjects who might be more anxious to use them against him than against the foreign enemy.”
J.W.
 



Stalin’s “right-hand man,” his “closest comrade-in-arms,” Molotov, has been removed from the post of Chairman of People’s Commissars which he has occupied for ten years, since December 1930. Stalin himself has assumed this key post in the Soviet government, his first public office in years. The only other governmental post ever held by Stalin was that of People’s Commissar of Nationalities under Lenin.
Why has Stalin taken such an unprecedented step? Reflected in the purge of Molotov and the assumption by Stalin of the premiership is the intensification of the unprecedented international and internal crisis into which the Soviet Union has been plunged by none other than Stalin himself. The international position of the Soviet Union is little short of catastrophic. Stalin’s latest maneuver is in part intended to make Molotov the scapegoat for the isolation of the USSR.
Among the Soviet masses, and within the ranks of the bureaucracy itself, there is growing alarm as Hitler’s war machine draws an ever tighter ring of steel along the Western frontiers. Hitler is now poised on the Scandinavian peninsula within striking distance of Leningrad, and in the South he threatens not only Soviet shipping lanes through the Dardanelles but also the oil supply in the Caucasus.
 
Red Army Weak
The weakness of the Red Army was revealed last year during the Finnish adventure. The real source of the weakness of the Red Army lies in the fatal bureaucratic regime. Stalin’s answer – he has no other – was to make Voroshilov the scapegoat. Last May, he removed Voroshilov, by kicking him “upstairs,” and appointed a nonentity, Timoshenko, as Commissar of War.
In the year that has elapsed the Red Army has not been strengthened but weakened, above all through the introduction of a new officer-caste from General to corporal.
This officer-caste has been invested with the power of life and death over the rank and file. The new disciplinary statutes of the Red Army are the severest in the world. But savage discipline cannot increase an army’s fighting morale, no more than investing an officer with the rank of a General can increase his capacity for leadership, or raise the confidence of the soldiers in his ability. The very first tests under fire will reveal how all of Stalin’s measures have served only to weaken the Red Army,
Simultaneously with assuming his new post of Premier, Stalin delivered his first public speech in years – a forty minutes’ address to the graduates of Soviet military academies. The sum and substance of this speech is a boast that the Red Army has been completely reorganized and rearmed. The very fact that it has been necessary to subject the Red Army to such “reorganization and rearming” constitutes a public admission of the inadequacy of the Red Army.
Stalin fools nobody, least of all Hitler, by his boasts of what has been achieved in the space of a single year, especially by his methods and under his regime. Under the best conditions, a year is too brief an interval for the reorganization and re-equipment of a vast modern army. No boast of Stalin can bolster up the morale of the Red Army or increase its fighting ability.
 
Economic Havoc
The defensive capacity of the Soviet Union has been weakened most gravely by the economic havoc created by the Stalinist regime.
The country is in the grip of the most serious economic difficulties since the termination of the Civil War and the introduction of the New Economic Policy (the NEP) in 1921. The Third Five Year Plan has been disrupted since 1938. The Kremlin’s own figures show that production in the key industries – iron, steel, coal – has remained stationary or has declined in recent years despite the investment of colossal sums for expansion. Soviet railway and river transport which collapsed under the burden of military requirements during the Finnish invasion cannot possibly withstand the strain of a major war.
 
Burden of Armament
Further unbearable strain has been placed upon industry by the need to divert more and more of the national production into military channels. Although the Soviet Union has not yet been sucked into the armed conflict, almost 70 billions of the 1941 budget have been allotted for the requirements of the Soviet armed forces. This amounts to not less than 40 per cent of the total national production. Far from lessening, this tendency will become more pronounced, especially with the actual outbreak of hostilities.
 
Dependence on Market
On top of the disruption of foreign trade has still further intensified the internal crisis. Far from having become self-sufficient in accordance with Stalin’s theory of building socialism in one country, Soviet economy still depends on the world market, above all for machines and machine tools. With the United States embargo, imposed by Roosevelt, the last source of these vital necessities has been cut off.
Moreover, the Stalin-Hitler pact serves only to drain increasing quantities of raw materials, and foodstuffs. Even if Hitler were willing to send the Soviet Union the necessary machinery and equipment in exchange, the needs of his own war economy would prevent him.
 
Stalin’s “Solution”
With what domestic measures has Stalin met this crisis? So far as the bureaucracy is concerned, Stalin has only reinforced its privileges. The bureaucracy has proved that it is incapable of making the least sacrifice for the defense of the Soviet Union. The bureaucrats refuse to relinquish by a single iota the enormous proportion of the national income which they devour.
In respect to the masses, however, no sacrifice is considered too great. The wages of the Russian workers have been slashed. Hours of work have been increased. The prices of daily necessities have skyrocketed, accompanied by increasing inflation and growing scarcity of goods. By a series of decrees the workers face criminal prosecution for quitting a job or even coming late to work; they face prison terms for turning out defective goods; they face charges of “hooliganism” in the event of accidents or breakdowns in the factory.
Children have been driven out of schools through the imposition of prohibitive tuitions and child labor has been introduced. The repressive measures adopted against the peasantry have been no less severe. The peasants have been corralled in the “collectives.” The cultivation of the landstrips has been severely restricted. The high taxation imposed on the peasants is tantamount to forced grain collections. All these laws have been passed in the last 12 months.
 
Stalin Fears Masses
The ferocity of these repressive measures is a gauge of the fear of the Stalin regime in the face of the increasing discontent and resistance of the masses. The fear of the regime is further indicated by such significant items as the allocation in the 1941 budget of 10 billion rubles to the GPU. This is the first time in history that the GPU has been openly included in the budget.
The crisis in the economy, which was further sharpened by the outbreak of World War II, has been reflected in a political crisis. In the past, Stalin has refurbished the prestige of his regime when confronted by such crises, by instituting a mass purge (Moscow Frameups, hunts for “spies” and “wreckers,” etc.). Since the outbreak of the war another mass purge has been in progress. But Stalin’s apparatus, of repression has become so corroded that it can no longer be reconstructed by a mass purge alone. More drastic measures are necessary.
Like the previous Bonapartes, Stalin is finding it necessary to reach for a crown. The formality of ruling through a party must be discarded – the danger of a clash between the upper and lower tiers of the party is too grave in the face of the domestic crisis and the war. It has become necessary to curb and stifle and weaken even the last vestiges of the party by concentrating all power in the state and by concentrating the state in the personal rule of one man.
The task of the 18th Party Conference last February was to remove the Communist Party from its dominant position in the country. At that time we wrote:
“Even the formality of ruling through the party – (which never was a monolithic bureaucratic entity but remains very heterogenous) – not only becomes cumbersome but actually turns into a grave obstacle to stability because of the very danger of a rift between its upper and lower tiers, because of the very threat, especially in war time conditions, that the Bonapartist rule may be challenged within the ranks of the party itself.” (Socialist Appeal, February 1, 1941)
At the same time we predicted in that same article that the bureaucracy is so ravaged by the crisis and so hopelessly divided that the only possible means of stabilizing the regime “lies in the open assumption of power by a single individual who rules as ar absolute dictator by virtue, of the control of the army and the GPU alone.”
Stalin’s open assumption of power, however, does not solve the crisis in the Soviet Union any more than a boil coming to a head cures an infection. The crisis will inevitably deepen still further and aggravate the discontent and resistance of the masses to the regime. By coming out into the open, Stalin only makes it possible for this discontent to precipitate itself upon his head as the real criminal responsible for the present unbearable impasse. Stalin’s present imposing height only measures the depth of the abyss he is approaching. The monolithic facade he has created will soon split wide, open, revealing the enormity of the crisis he is trying to cover up.
Today more than ever before, the defense of the Soviet Union means first and foremost a political revolution that will overthrow Stalin and his regime and restore workers’ democracy in the Soviet Union.
 



It is impossible for Stalin to hide any longer the gravity of the rift between himself and the officers’ corps of the Red Army. Stalin’s October 19 order “for a state of siege in Moscow” revealed to the world the growing intensity of this conflict. This order was, in effect, the first official acknowledgment of the re-shuffling of the Red High Command, which is in itself a symptom of the crisis now convulsing the Kremlin-Kui- bishev regime. But far overshadowing it in significance was another disclosure contained in this order, i.e., that Stalin is now openly relying on the GPU as his only remaining dependable prop.
The full implications of the latest re-shuffling of the High Command and the investment of the GPU with open and sweeping powers not only over the population but over the Red Army itself, soldiers and officers alike – all this can be best understood in the light of Stalin’s previous measures – a whole series in which the “shoot-on-the-spot” ukase of October 19 is only the latest link.
On June 22, the first day of the German invasion, the European territories of the USSR were placed under martial law, with the military authorities in command.
Almost, immediately Stalin demonstrated his lack of confidence in the Red command by forming, on June 30, the State Committee for Defense (composed of Stalin, Molotov, Voroshilov, Malenkov and Berya). The then-Commissar for Defense and Commander-in- Chief of the armed forces, Marshall Timoshenko, was not included in this body. This was not an ‘oversight,’ but rather it was Stalin’s step in stripping the Red command of its powers.
Next, the High Command was reshuffled on July 11. (Timoshenko assumed command of the Moscow Military District, or the Western Central Army; Budenny – the Kiev Military District, or the South Army; and Voroshilov – the Leningrad Military District, or the Northwestern Army).
 
Political Commissars Reintroduced
Almost unanimously [sic!] with this reshuffling of the High Command, the system of political commissars was reintroduced in the army on July 16. It is hardly necessary to dwell on the fact that this introduction of dual authority in the armed forces was a blow at the officers, stripping them of authority, and, in effect, subordinating them to the secret police arm of the regime, the GPU.
(It should be recalled that the system of political commissars was originally reintroduced by Stalin in August 1937 to facilitate the beheading of the Red Army at the time. This system was revoked – undoubtedly under the pressure of the officers – on August 12, 1940, after the blows of the Finnish experience.)
Each of the above-cited measures was designed not to strengthen the defensive power of the Red Army, but rather to facilitate Stalin’s open assumption of the supreme command of the armed forces. They were political measures typical of Stalin’s rule. On July 19, he replaced Timoshenko as People’s Commissar for Defense.
On the very next day, the world learned that the Kremlin’s secret police had been once again reorganized. Only a few months before, in February, the GPU had been divided into two autonomous departments, namely, the People’s Commissariat of Internal Affairs and the People’s Commissariat of State Security. The latter department was virtually placed under the jurisdiction of the Red command. The February “reorganization” was apparently another sop to the officers’ corps, a sort of guarantee against mass purges in the army. On July 20, these two departments were “unified” again under the control of Stalin’s puppet, Berya.
On July 21, the system of political commissars was extended to the Red Fleet.
On the same day, more deputies were appointed for the post of Commissar of Defense. The significant thing about these new appointees is that among them were political commissars. In other words, the Commissariat of Defense was itself placed directly under the supervision of the GPU. Stalin had gathered all the threads of power into his own hands.
 
What These Steps Signified
The capitalist press interpreted all these moves as preventive measures designed to forestall any attempts at betrayal by the officers. It is undeniable that the Red command has many unreliable elements. They have found it easiest to advance precisely under the Kremlin regime.
But this interpretation evades the entire history of the Soviet Union under Stalin’s rule. Today as in the past, Stalin’s moves are dictated and motivated solely by his ruthless struggle to maintain himself in power. He realized at the very outbreak of war that the officers’ corps whom he had himself raised to power a short while ago could not be depended upon to follow him blindly. The officers could not fail to become alarmed by the continued defeats of the Red Army. Besides, their own lives were at stake. Stalin’s only answer was to resort openly under war-time conditions to the real bulwark of his regime – the execution squads of the GPU. It is they, and not the military authorities who are now in supreme control in beleaguered Moscow, and this means – everywhere, both in the front lines and in the rear.
Stalin’s monstrous bureaucratic apparatus of repression began crumbling on the eve of the second World War. The war has violently speeded up this process of disintegration. The military arm of Stalin’s bureaucratic apparatus has crumbled beyond repair after less than five months of war.
 
Stalinism Threatens Defense of USSR
We are now witnessing the final stages of the death agony of Stalinism. These final convulsions, however, carry with them also a mortal threat to the USSR, whose strength is being sapped internally by the continuation of Stalin’s rule. Every day, every hour of the struggle brings additional overwhelming proof that the Soviet Union can be successfully defended only by the reconstitution of the Soviets and the return to the policies of Bolshevism which guaranteed the victory in October 1917 and beat back the imperialists and the counter-revolution in the Civil War of 1918–1920.
 



One of Stalin’s most brazen lies is that by signing the pact with Hitler he had gained and used precious breathing space to bolster the industry and defenses of the USSR. Just the contrary is true. What might indeed have been such a breathing space was utilized by the Kremlin solely in the interests of perpetuating its own rule. Instead of being strengthened the Soviet Union was still further undermined by Stalinism precisely in the period of the Stalin-Hitler pact (1939–1941).
Stalin himself presented the world with incontrovertible proof of this during the sessions of the Eighteenth Party Conference which convened in Moscow in February 1941. The Kremlin’s implacable censorship succeeded in partially suppressing the truth by keeping the issues of the official Moscow press from reaching this country; and by prohibiting even the text of its own laws for this period from being, transmitted abroad. After almost a year’s delay issues of Pravda are at last available.
The conditions had become so grave that Stalin’s personal organ was itself compelled to reveal the economic chaos into which his leadership, his policies and bureaucratic regime had plunged the country.
From the vast quantity of available material we select only several items from Malenkov’s report to the Eighteenth Party Conference. (Stalin preferred to keep mum throughout the sessions.)
Malenkov’s report constitutes, in and of itself, an indictment of Stalin’s regime. It is a confession of bankruptcy.
What was the keynote of Malenkov’s report? In the language of Stalinist double-talk it reads: “The impermissible utilization of the productive capacities of our enterprises.”
To drive home his point to the assembled bureaucrats, Malenkov singled out the conditions in the Soviet cement industry.
“The productive capacity of the cement industry,” said Malenkov, “is growing from one year to the next. In 1936 the productive capacity of all cement plants was 6,701 thousand tons; in 1937 it rose to 7,024 thousand tons; in 1938 to 7,604 thousand tons; in 1939 – 7,967 thousand tons; and in 1940 – 8,206 thousand tons.
“Meanwhile the utilization of these productive capacities during these years has been dropping systematically. Thus if the productive capacity of cement factories in 1936 was utilized 88% in 1936, which is very poor, then in 1937 this utilization was still poorer, being only 77%; in 1938 it was 75%; in 1939 – 65%; and in 1940, all told only 64%.” (Pravda, February 16, 1941)
 
What Malenkov’s Report Revealed
At first sight the full implication of this mass of statistics tends to escape the reader. They are almost incredible. Let us take, for example, the official admission that throughout 1939 1940 the cement industry had been operating at or below 65% capacity. Translated into ordinary language this means that more that one-third of the Soviet cement plants were standing idle during these years. What can this denote if not a condition verging on economic collapse?
But the data supplied by Malenkov provide much more significant information. To bring it out most graphically we have compiled a table based on the Kremlin’s own statistics. (We have added a third set of figures relating to the actual output. Malenkov carefully evaded specifying these figures, but they are implicit in his own data, and therefore are as authoritative and official as those which he did cite.)



CONDITION OF SOVIET CEMENT INDUSTRY (1938 – 1940)




Year


Productive Capacity
(in thousands of tons)


Output
(in %)


Actual Output
(in thousands of tons)




1938


7,604


75


6,703




1939


7,967


65


5,178




1940


8,206


64


6,252



By performing a simple arithmetical operation we now learn that: under Stalinism, while the productive capacity of Soviet cement industry expanded from 1938 to 1940 by 602 thousand tons (8,206 minus 7,604), the actual output declined by 451 thousand tons (5,703 minus 5,252) in the same period.
 
More Plants, Less Production
Under Stalin the addition of new plants instead of increasing Soviet production resulted in – decreasing it! Expressed here in terms of tons of cement is the irreconcilable conflict between the needs of Soviet economy and the fetters of Stalin’s regime. The Kremlin bureaucracy was strangling Soviet industry on the eve of the invasion just as it is now strangling the struggle on the military arena.
It is hardly necessary to stress the importance of the cement industry so vital not only for peace-time production but for the requirements of Soviet defense (roads, armament plants, field defenses, etc.). Malenkov himself complained: “After all, comrades, cement, it seems, does not play the least and last role in our capital construction.”
To what extent is it permissible to apply the conditions prevailing in the cement industry to other branches of Soviet economy? Stalin-Malenkov and Co. do not dare cite comprehensive figures for production. However, in his report Malenkov did not mention a single branch of industry which had functioned satisfactorily. Whenever he did refer, in passing, to other branches, it was only to reveal conditions still more appalling. For instance, in mentioning the timber industry, Malenkov remarked that its productive capacity had been “utilized only 41 per cent.”
“And, after all, comrades,” commented the reporter, “timber is very very much needed by our industry and transport.” Lumber is needed not only in production but for mass consumption. But the needs of the Soviet consumer never did enter into the calculations of the bureaucracy.
Among the “industrial cities in which big enterprises are concentrated and which do not fulfill their productive quotas,” Malenkov himself listed the following: Gorki, Dnepropetrovsk, Stalingrad, Kalinin, Chelyabinsk, Tula, Yaroslavl, Stalino, etc.
All of Malenkov’s admissions, “omissions” and evasions plus the fact that the official press had been filled for months prior to the Conference with data, “alarm-signals” and fulminations concerning the lag in coal, steel, iron, rolled steel, oil, etc. – all this enables us to state with complete assurance that the conditions revealed by Malenkov in the cement industry were not an exception but the rule for Soviet industry as a whole. Despite the untold billions of rubles pumped by the Kremlin into new plants, equipment, etc.; despite the monstrous pressure exerted by the Kremlin on the workers (the June, 1940 anti-labor laws, the introduction of child labor by ukase of October 2, 1940, etc., etc.); despite bestial repressions and purges, or rather precisely because of all this – Soviet production had been not only stagnating but declining catastrophically throughout the period of the Stalin-Hitler pact. This is how Stalin was “strengthening” the USSR!
 
The Cause for the Collapse of the Third Five-Year Plan
While piling up disproportion upon disproportion in its “planning,” the bureaucracy further disrupted production by such methods as these:
“It happens frequently,” reported Malenkov, “that scarce and highly specialized equipment, complex industrial aggregates, big lathes are either not used for the purpose for which they are intended or are made to operate with inadequate loads. Simple operations are performed on such specialized equipment or tiny details are manufactured which could be more rationally produced on small and simple machines.”
As an illustration, Malenkov cited the fact that the biggest lathes were “not infrequently, used to manufacture details the size of tea saucers.”
On February 18, Pravda, commenting on the Conference, declared with an air of hypocritical amazement:
“During yesterday’s sessions (of the Conference) the delegates adduced astonishing facts concerning incompetence in relation to technology.”
This “incompetence” was generalized by Malenkov in the following terms:
“In many enterprises equipment, raw materials and tools direly needed by our industry are piled up anywhere, everywhere; they become spoiled, they grow rusty and are rendered worthless.”
In Stalinist double-talk “many enterprises” really means all enterprises. Malenkov himself blurted this out when he told the delegates at the Conference to supplement his words by their own experience:
“Facts relating to this state of affairs,” he said, “you, comrades, can find in the enterprises of your own oblast (regional district) and city districts.”
Pravda took further note of “incompetence” by stating editorially:
“We still have not a few leaders who think nothing of producing worthless goods, of violating technological standards; people for whom dirt in production is a normal condition of production.” (Pravda, February 15, 1941)
 
Stalin’s Rule – The Reign of Filth
Malenkov, in an excess of zeal, developed this point in much greater detail:
“In many of our enterprises, guilds, factory areas and yards, in depots, railway shops, power stations, railways, sea and river ports, there is a reign of filth. Workplaces, equipment, tools and raw materials are kept carelessly.”
And further:
“Examples of bureaucratism, red tape, failure to check orders, and so forth exist unfortunately in every People’s Commissariat.”
The only thing left out in this catalogue is – the Kremlin. By admission of its own mouthpiece, the regime of the Kremlin can be properly characterized only as: The Reign of Filth!
Is it to be wondered at that under such conditions, production drops to 65%, 41% of capacity and even lower?
Among the most significant passages in Malenkov’s report are those dealing with the problem of industrial stoppages, breakdowns, accidents, etc. As is well known, the GPU has framed up and executed thousands upon thousands of Bolsheviks, collaborators of Lenin, heroes of the Civil War for acts of “sabotage and wrecking.” But who was really responsible?
Again, we give the floor to Malenkov.
“Equipment which is left unattended,” he thundered, “equipment which is not kept in conditions of necessary cleanliness and orderliness often refuses (sic) to function.
“Accidents and catastrophes are inevitable wherever there is no cleanliness and order.”
To find the chief saboteur and wrecker in the USSR one need look no further than the Kremlin. Stalin and his clique – here is the fountainhead of this bureaucratism; of this reign of filth; of these “refusals” of equipment to function; of these “inevitable” accidents and catastrophes – in short, of all the evils and misfortunes that have befallen the land of the Soviets.
 
Stalin’s Thieves Plunder Industry
To believe Malenkov, one of the chief reasons for failures in industry really lies in the sphere of faulty bookkeeping.
He cited a director of a non-ferrous metallurgical plant who asked for information concerning the amount of unfinished products on hand in one of his departments.
“The bookkeeper’s office,” reported Malenkov, “gave him the figure of 81.8 tons; the planning department set the figure at 47.7 tons; the records of the department itself fixed it at 51.5 tons; and when stock was actually taken the amount was 11 tons.”
But Pravda itself exploded Malenkov’s alibi. Faulty bookkeeping alone does not account for these and similar “discrepancies” of 40 to 50 tons, and more. On the very eve of the Conference Stalin issued a ukase forbidding thieves – in the ukasethey are referred to as “directors of industry” – “to sell, exchange or rent out equipment and materials.” Henceforth such transactions were to be considered as “masked plundering of socialist property” and the penalty imposed was “imprisonment from two to five years”. (Pravda, February 11, 1941)
Pravda had this to say in connection with the ukase:
“Surplus equipment is being embezzled in the most undisguised manner; directors of factories consider themselves legally entitled to buy and sell equipment and raw materials.” (Pravda, February 12, 1941)
It is necessary to introduce a slight correction into Pravda’s terminology. Stalinist “directors” not only had considered themselves entitled to dispose of nationalized property as they pleased, but they had been doing it for years. It was one of their secret privileges. What monstrous proportions must these transactions have reached if the Kremlin found itself compelled to declare them illegal?
On the day after the publication of the ukase, Pravda came out with disclosures of huge embezzlements of equipment, raw materials, etc. in various People’s Commissariats, among them the People’s Commissariat of the Timber Industry. The “directors” of this particular industry were obviously too busy “buying and selling” to bother their heads about such details as the fact that their plants were operating at 41% capacity. Thieves and grafters could not ask for a better milieu for their operations than the one provided by Stalin’s regime.
What alibi did Stalin himself offer to explain away the economic chaos into which he had plunged the USSR less than four months before Hitler launched his invasion. Apart from the inevitable scapegoats, the “Father of the Peoples” could proffer only a draft of a “Fifteen Year Plan” to replace his completely discredited and bankrupt “Five Year Plans.”
* * *
The development of Soviet economy has been depicted by the Kremlin and its prostitutes as an uninterrupted march from one triumph to another: from the achievement of the “irrevocable triumph of socialism” to the arrival of Soviet society at the “very threshold of communism.” These boasts and lies of Stalinism hypnotized thousands of revolutionary workers in all countries. The tragic thing is that they were the only ones whom Stalin succeeded in deceiving about the true conditions of Soviet internal affairs. The chancelleries of the imperialists, “democratic” and fascist alike, have been aware that since 1936–1937 – the years of the infamous Moscow frame-ups – Soviet economy had been convulsed by one crisis after another. This catastrophic condition was further aggravated by Stalin’s blood purges which decimated the administrative and technological staffs, and beheaded the Red Army. The greatest ravages in economy and, consequently, in defense took place precisely during 1939–1941, i.e., the period of the Stalin-Hitler pact.
The chaos into which Stalin had plunged the country was known to Hitler. It was undoubtedly one of the considerations which impelled the German General Staff to launch the invasion in June 1941.
All the crimes and abominations of Stalinism are now revealing themselves on the military arena. Stalin, and Stalin alone, bears the responsibility for all the defeats suffered by the Red Army. At the first favorable opportunity, without weakening the front against the imperialists, the Red Army and the Soviet masses must rid the country of the Stalinist regime which stifles all initiative and constitutes the chief internal obstacle to the victorious defense of the USSR.
 




Mr. Walter Duranty has returned to his old occupation of scooping the Daily Worker. His very first dispatch, dated Moscow, January 21, contains very important, even sensational news. He is able to announce to the world what the tasks of the Eighteenth Party Conference really are: The Communist Party of the Soviet Union is no longer to hold its former position in the country. It is being re-organised along new and different lines.
Duranty’s cautious formulation reads:
“There is a new, more flexible and more practicable conception of the position and duties of the Communist Party ... in relation to the nation in general and the national effort in particular.” (N.Y. Times, January 22, 1941)
The call for the Eighteenth Party Conference issued by Stalin on December 20 did not breathe a single word about reorganizing the party along new, less rigid and more practical lines “in relation to the nation in general and national effort in particular.” This is the first inkling that such unprecedented and drastic measures were contemplated and even applied during the so-called pre-Conference period when only discussion is supposedly in order. Yet, more than three weeks before the Conference itself convenes, Duranty was permitted to refer to it as an accomplished fact, as a “conception” already realized in life. Apparently the only thing left for the Eighteenth Party Conference scheduled for February 15 is to vote – unanimously, of course.
When the December 20th call for the Conference was released, we ventured the following prognosis:
“The second point on the agenda, The Organizational Question, implies that there are shortcomings in the existing organizational set-up which obstruct the party’s work in transport and in industry – and therefore the party must be most certainly ‘renovated’ organizationally.”
And we concluded: “A major surgical operation is now in progress.” (Socialist Appeal, December 28, 1940). It is now possible to appraise Stalin’s major operation much more accurately. It goes beyond a large-scale purge, so serviceable in the past, but manifestly not adequate in the existing conditions. Directly involved is a blow at the party’s position in the country and its dominant role in economy (“the national effort”).
 
Duranty, Agent of Stalin’s GPU
One may anticipate at this point a possible objection that it is, after all, impermissible to attach so much importance to a single, and somewhat vague, sentence in a dispatch by Duranty. It is not at all, however, a casual passage but a central point to which Duranty elaborately and carefully leads up. The entire stress in this dispatch is placed by Duranty on the profound, well-nigh incredible changes which have transformed beyond recognition and have vastly improved (of course! of course!) – every sphere of Soviet life since 1940 – when, as Duranty acknowledges in passing, “conditions were admittedly difficult.” (“Admittedly”!!! Where admitted? When?)
“Russia has changed enormously in the last year,” announces Duranty, and with an assumed air of discovery and astonishment adds, “I never thought that twelve months could make such a difference of atmosphere, tone, and fact.” Then, after meticulously listing the reorganization of the army, navy, and air force, of industry, trade, transport, finance and education, he tops it all off with the reorganization of the party.
As for Duranty himself, his role was completely exposed several years ago during the infamous Moscow Trials. At that, time, although no longer the Moscow correspondent of the New York Times, he happened, as is well known, to be fortuitously present at each trial; and together with the Englishman, Pritt; the German, Feuchtwangler and all the other literary scavengers, Duranty crawled out of his skin to demonstrate that no assignment in the service of the GPU paymasters was too filthy for him. If Duranty is now in the Soviet Union, it is by order of his real employer in the Kremlin, and not of the New York Times, or the latter’s news syndicate, the North American Newspaper Alliance. Duranty’s job was and is to secure for the Kremlin favorable publicity in the American press, and to prepare public opinion for Soviet domestic developments. Whatever Duranty writes is passed by the censors because it is composed under GPU supervision and bears the GPU seal of approval.
But most important of all, supplementary data corroborating Duranty’s scoop is available. The party has been constantly and ever more harshly criticised in the press for its shortcomings and failures in the general “reorganization” of the country, that is, in the fulfillment of the June 26 anti-labor laws, the turning of Soviet factories into virtual prisons, the introduction of child labor, the abolition of free education, the extension of the June 26 laws to the technical staff, etc., etc.; the purge of the trade unions, of the Komsomols, of directors and engineers, of authors and dramatists, etc. etc. “The Soviet press,” Duranty casually remarks, “is far more prodigal of complaints and criticisms than might be guessed from the messages of foreign correspondents.” (He piously refrains from mentioning that with the departure of Gedye last summer the only foreign correspondents remaining in Moscow were the Nazis and the skeleton crews of the major news services; that only the dispatches of me T.A.S.S. – Stalin’s official news agency – could be transmitted to America and the T.A.S.S., as may easily be guessed, refrains from broadcasting any complaints or criticism.)
Moreover, on December 20 the news was released by Moscow that a vital section of Soviet industry, namely, the defense industry had been placed under the supervision of the Army. A week ago came a TASS dispatch to the effect that special local committees would henceforth supervise industries producing consumer’s goods. These local committees are “non-party”, i.e. handpicked and controlled directly by the GPU itself. Thus the economic life of the country is in effect no longer under the party’s supervision.
 
Why Should Stalin Weaken His Party?
At first glance such a development seems not only unexpected but inexplicable. Why should Stalin who has ruled all these years in the name of the completely bureaucratized party seek to undermine what appears to be one of the basic and most indispensable props of his rule? Doesn’t Stalin weaken himself by weakening the position of the party? The party embraces the most privileged sections of the bureaucracy. Isn’t this likewise a blow at them? Doesn’t this mean a split in the bureaucracy itself? And so forth and so on. The situation is indeed complex. A formal, schematic and therefore superficial approach cannot possibly provide a correct answer.
In 1934, comrade Trotsky wrote:
“The vast practical importance of a correct theoretical orientation is most strikingly manifested in. a period of acute social conflict, of rapid political shifts, of abrupt changes in the situation ... It is in just such periods that all sorts of transitional, intermediate situations arise, as a matter of necessity, which upset the customary patterns and doubly require a sustained theoretical attention.”
What we are now witnessing in the Soviet Union is precisely a transitional, intermediate combination of developments against the background of acute social conflict, rapid political shifts and abrupt changes in the situation. We define the Stalinist regime as Bonapartist, that is, a government, which raises itself above a social system – in this case, a degenerated workers’ state. This government, however, is not suspended in mid-air. At all times, a Bonapartist regime rests on a buttress, or axis which becomes more and more narrow as the contradictions between the political superstructure and the economic foundation grow more and more acute.
As the true axis of the regime constricts, power becomes personalized more and more openly; it becomes associated more and more with Stalin not as the unchallenged dictator of the party who rules behind the scenes but as the undisputed dictator of the State itself. The true axis of Stalin’s regime today passes through the police, the bureaucratic tops, the newly constituted military officers’ caste and the GPU.
 
The Party Is Now an Obstacle to Stalin
Even the formality of ruling through the party – (which never was a monolithic bureaucratic entity but remains very heterogeneous) – not only becomes cumbersome but actually turns into a grave obstacle to stability because of the very danger of a rift between its upper and the lower tiers, because of the very threat, especially in war-time conditions, that the Bonapartist rule may be challenged within the ranks of the party itself. But this does not mean that the party must be completely and immediately eliminated, far from it This means that the party must be relegated to such a position as to render it incapable of directly challenging Stalin’s power. Hence flows the constant need of applying preventive measures to guard precisely against such a contingency. Hitherto purges sufficed. Today a “reorganization” is required. This dangerous and by no means simple operation will not and cannot be effectively accomplished with a single stroke, but requires a series of well-calculated steps, well-timed, well-prepared – in point of assault as well as possible retreat – of which the first is the Eighteenth Party Conference.
Apparently only the lower ranks, the local party units are today being shorn of their dominant position, especially in relation to industry; the status of the tops will be left unimpaired for the time being. Should it prove, however, that both the tops and the lower ranks are affected by the “reorganization,” this will mean that the crisis of the regime has reached a stage far more acute than the one estimated above. It will mean that the bureaucracy is so ravaged by the crisis and so hopelessly divided that the only possible means of stabilisation lies in the open assumption of power by a single individual who rules as an absolute dictator by virtue of the control of the Army and the GPU alone.
We have, of course, assumed throughout that the party as a whole is so completely degenerated, so drained of all power of resistance as to render it incapable of waging a defensive battle in self-protection. The next few weeks will bring a verification.
January 25, 1940
 







UKASE OF THE PRAESIDIUM OF THE SUPREME COUNCIL OF THE USSR ON THE CHANGE TO THE 8-HOUR WORKING DAT AND 7-DAY WORKING WEEK; AND THE PROHIBITION OF SELF-WILLED DEPARTURE OF WORKERS AND EMPLOYES FROM ENTERPRISES AND INSTITUTIONS:
... Article 5: Workers and employees who arbitrarily leave state, cooperative and public enterprises and/or institutions are remitted to court and by sentence of People’s Judges incarcerated in prisons for a term of 2 to 4 months.
For stopping or skipping work without serious reason workers and employees of state, cooperative and public enterprises and/or institutions are remitted to court and sentenced by People’s Judges to terms up to six months of penal labor at place of employment, and up to 25 per cent of their wages withheld. Ukase dated June 26, 1940, first published June 27, 1940.



The 1940 Ukases of the Kremlin mirror the irreconcilable conflict between the fetters of Stalin’s totalitarian regime and the needs of Soviet economic life and development From the beginning, this conflict assumed its sharpest forms in the attempts of the bureaucracy to lace into its totalitarian strait-jacket the working class, the greatest productive force in society. The June 26, 1940, laws represent the concentrated and most extreme expression to date of Stalin’s previous labor laws. To understand what is now taking place in the Soviet Union it is therefore necessary, first of all, to understand the root causes which underline these measures against the working class.
 
Stalin’s Labor Legislation: 1927–1940
Stalin abolished the 35-hour week and instituted the 48-hour week on June 26, 1940. One legal fiction has been replaced by another. But underlying both is a thirteen year campaign to lengthen the working day and cut wages – the Kremlin’s one and only method of raising the productivity of labor which, despite the colossal development of Soviet industry, has remained at the lowest levels in the world.
The seven-hour day, five-day week was introduced by Stalin as a political measure in 1927, the year when the struggle against the Left Opposition (Trotskyists) reached its climax. By means of this legislation Stalin sought to lull the workers, and to demonstrate to them that their interests were as dear to him as to the Opposition. But to the mass of the workers, it remained a seven-hour day in name only. Every factory director always had and still has at his disposal a quota of several hundred thousand man-hours “overtime” and these additional hours were and are apportioned among the workers, thus lengthening the working-day everywhere beyond the “legal” limit. In the period of the first Five Year Plan the methods of “shock-brigadeism” were applied as a supplementary means of rendering labor more productive. The wages of Soviet workers, in this period of currency inflation and acute famine of necessities, were reduced to miserable rations.
With the abolition of the card system, the stabilization and unification of prices, Soviet industry switched over to piecework wages (1935). The chase after the rouble now acquired a very real meaning, and the bureaucracy immediately utilized it as a “spontaneous” means of increasing the pressure on the working class. The system of shock-brigadeism,” which achieved Just the opposite of what had been intended, was replaced by Stakhanovism (August 1935).
 
STAKHANOVISM: In a brilliant analysis of this administrative measure at its very inception, Leon Sedov point ed out that the Stakhanov movement was in itself reducible to an intensification of labor, and to the lengthening of the working day. To set and break records, the Stakhanovists had to utilize their “non-working” time to put their benches and tools in order, sort their raw material; the brigadiers had to instruct their brigades, etc. The trend toward a longer working day was immediately apparent even from the scanty data then published in the Soviet press. Thus, on the Donetz Railway the machinists began working 250–290 hours a month, a working day of 10–11½ hours. In many plants the day off was cancelled, increasing the working hours. In other enterprises the directors themselves issued orders lengthening the hours. Cases of a working day of 10 hours, 14 hours and even 16 hours were not uncommon. “We have adduced these isolated facts” wrote Sedov in December 1935, “because there cannot be talk of any kind of free statistical data concerning the working-day in Soviet Russia. But these examples,” he concluded, “indicate that the 7–8-hour working day is being dealt blows from all sides, while the Stakhanov movement carries with it the threat of liquidating it altogether.” The subsequent legislation of the Kremlin completely corroborated this prediction.
Precisely because the Stakhanov movement, under Stalin’s regime, reduced itself to speed-up, longer hours, higher norms, lower piece-work rates, etc., it met with a stubborn resistance on the part of the workers. Accounts of the Stakhanov campaign in the official press presented at times the picture of a small civil war. Trud, the organ of the trade unions, wrote at this period: “The class struggle makes itself felt at every step.” In this “class” struggle, Trotsky pointed out, the workers are on one side, the trade unions on the other.
The intensity of this struggle was from the outset reflected in the purges of the trade unions, a section of the apparatus closest to the masses and most directly affected by their pressure.
In an article entitled: Trade Unions Re-Organized to Cope with Important New Tasks, P. Moskatov, Secretary of the All-Union Central Council of the Trade Unions wrote in 1937, when Stakhanovism was already in decline:
“Soviet trade unions are in the process of thorough reorganization ... Enemies of socialism and of the working-class – the Mensheviks, the Trotskyite and Bukharinite traitors – did their utmost to isolate the trade unions from the Party. In the new conditions brought about by the gigantic growth of Socialism,” continued Moskatov, “the leading trade union bodies were not up to the mark. They had become isolated from the masses and could not, therefore, lead their matured political activity, nor further a wide development of the Stakhanov movement.” (Moscow News, Nov. 7, 1937)
On the Twentieth Anniversary of the October Revolution, according to the same Moskatov:
“Ninety per cent of the members of the Central Committees of the Unions are newly elected. Fifty-five per cent of the chairmen of Central Committees and eighty-five per cent of the secretaries are also serving their first terms. The most capable men and women loyal to the party, are being promoted to the leadership in the Central Committees.” (Idem)
But Stakhanovism could not get any further even with these revamped trade unions; it had to be “supplemented” by ferocious administrative measures, which came in December 1938, and with them, necessarily, another trade union purge.
A year later Pravda greeted ecstatically the 1939 model of trade unions which at long last included:
“The flower of the working class and of the intelligentsia of the USSR, scores and hundreds of notable people of our fatherland; the chosen of the people – Deputies of the Supreme Council of the USSR of Federated and of Autonomous Republics; people worthy of highest awards – the orders and medals of the USSR; the trade union ‘active’ which has matured in recent years, educated by the party of Lenin-Stalin.” (Pravda, Oct. 31, 1939)
In a brief nine months this same “flower of the working class and intelligentsia” was to be decimated (July 1940) as darmoyedniki (scoundrels who eat bread which they haven’t earned) and bezdelniki (scoundrels who idle away their time).
 
THE DECEMBER 1938 LAWS: By the end of the Second Five Year Plan none of the burning problems of Soviet economy had been solved. In fact, they had become more aggravated. Stakhanovism was as complete a failure as its predecessor, “shock-brigadeism.” But the myth of its wonder-work had to be maintained, because Stalin was personally compromised.
On December 28, 1938, Stalin invalidated the Soviet labor code introduced under Lenin in December 1922. The Soviet system of social security was likewise, in effect, liquidated. By administrative decree, the productivity of labor was increased “25 per cent,” i.e., a speed-up of 25 per cent. The direct wage cuts were fixed at 14 per cent. A system of labor (fink) books was introduced to shackle the workers to the factories. Workers were to be fired on the fourth time they came late to work.
The workers themselves insisted on a rigid application of this particular clause, inasmuch as after four violations they were left free to seek employment elsewhere, easily obtainable in view of the acute shortage of labor and the urgent need of directors to fulfill their plan quotas. The 1938 measure, as usual, came into complete opposition with its own aims. Production was still further disrupted by observance of the laws. Sharper administrative reprisals were the answer.
On January 8, 1939, came another wage cut. Wage cuts aggravated the situation. Nevertheless in 1940, in the space of six months, two additional direct wage cuts preceded the passage of the June 26 laws, which themselves contained an indirect wage cut. The labor turnover sky-rocketed.
 
The “Fluidity” of Labor and the Crises in Economy
In the period of the First Five Year Plan the labor turnover assumed monstrous proportions: from official estimates it can be set at 30-50 per cent. The vast influx of millions of peasants enabled Soviet industry to survive in those years. The turnover of labor in the period of the Second Five Year Plan, just prior to the passage of the December 1938 legislation rose to the almost incredible figure of 50–62 per cent. No industry can withstand such a condition. It cuts down the levels of productivity already achieved, aggravates the already acute labor shortage, disorganizes production itself, and constitutes one of the major causes for the periodic breakdowns of the plans.
The catastrophic conditions in industry in 1940 – the second year of the Third Five Year Plan – reproduce, recapitulate and deepen under war-time conditions all the contradictions of the preceding stages. The current crisis creeps out in every issue of the press. Thus, Pravda in boasting of the successes of the latest legislation, claims the fulfillment of the plan for coal production for the first ten days in October, and in the same breath adds, “Something that hasn’t happened in a long time.” (Pravda, Oct. 24)
P. Lomako, People’s Commissar of Non-Ferrous Metallurgy, makes the same claim for his commissariat, and then exclaims: “This is an unprecedented situation for non-ferrous metallurgy.” (Pravda, Oct. 26)
Similar quotations can be cited at will from one branch of industry to another, through the length and breadth of the land. It is no longer “a secret” that the Third Five Year Plan has been gravely disrupted.
In the period of the First Five Year Plan the bureaucracy fixed the blame for economic difficulties, failures, and the crisis on: Mensheviks, SR’s, bourgeois and petty-bourgeois specialists who played the role of “saboteurs,” “wreckers,” “agents of imperialism,” and “restorationists of capitalism” in the first infamous Moscow frame-ups. The accompanying and comparatively mild purge disrupted the economic life still further. It was only a rehearsal.
The entire generation that made the October Revolution was placed in the defendants’ dock and murdered in the dungeons of the GPU as “enemies of the people,” “wreckers,” etc., in the second and major edition of the Moscow Trials. In the period of the Second Five Year Plan the accompanying purge, in which tens of thousands were shot and hundreds of thousands jailed plunged Soviet industry into the chaotic condition from which it has still to emerge.
Since December, 1938, Stalin has pinned the blame on the entire Soviet working class, allegedly composed of “dis-organizers of production,” “violators of discipline,” “laggards,” and “floaters.” A third edition of the Moscow Trials is now in preparation.
 
Bureaucratic Roots of Labor “Fluidity”: Working Conditions
Under the present regime the conditions in Soviet factories have been almost beyond the power of language to describe. Here, for example, is a 1940 picture painted by Pravda of a large textile combine near Moscow:
The factory ceilings and walls are black with accumulated lint, dirt and soot. Floors are covered with mud and filth. Remnants of stale, and, in all probability, indigestible food decorate the window sills. Delicate machine-parts litter the floor. The looms themselves “create the impression that they haven’t been cleaned in a long time.” In the summer the rains pour in through the skylights. “So much water leaked into some textile guilds that work had to be suspended. In order to obtain passage from one loom to the next, planks had to be laid over the water.” “It is difficult to imagine,” wonders Pravda, “how the director of the plant made the inspection tour of the guild in those days.” Pravda, as usual, is not concerned with the question of how the workers “made their rounds.” To be sure, these particular skylights were fixed but “all the defects are still to be eliminated.” Pravda objects that in places “which still lack ventilation” the moisture – inside! – collects on the skylights, drops below, drops on the floor, on the cloth. Spots result. The premises must indeed be damp for so much moisture to condense. If there isn’t enough air for moisture to evaporate, then very little must have been left for the workers to breathe – after the skylights had been repaired, i.e., hermetically sealed. The smug parasites in Pravda who entitle this article Filth and Defective Goods are concerned with more important things than air for the workers, for instance, the condition of floors: “Near the looms,” they rage, “there is filth. Shuttles and pieces of cloth sometimes drop on the floor.” Not a word about the workers on whom the moisture also drops, and who at all times must wade through filth. When this highly “inefficient” condition was called to the attention of the director, he replied: “Of course, we don’t boast of maintaining our place in ideal cleanliness, but the condition is quite normal and tolerable (?)” (Pravda, October 27, 1940, the query is in the original). If such “normal” and “tolerable” conditions prevail in and around Moscow, that is, in the center, what must be the conditions in the provinces?
N. Siluyanov, Deputy People’s Commissar of Non-Ferrous Metallurgy reports:
“In the factory (the Karsakpaisky Copper Plant) the number of accidents to machinery has increased. The loss of labor time because of accidents and stoppages of aggregates results in disrupting the production plans. In the Balkhash plant there are likewise a great many stoppages and many accidents. In the eight months of the current year 211 accidents were recorded there. This is considerably more than last year. It has been calculated that because of the idleness of mechanisms alone, there has been a loss of 2,000 tons of copper. Why do accidents occur? 38 per cent of the accidents occurred because of gross violations of elementary rules of the technical exploitation of aggregates and mechanisms.” (Pravda, Oct, 9, 1940)
The Deputy People’s Commissar refrains from calculating the number of workers maimed and killed in these accidents.
The conditions in the Stalingrad tractor plant, one of the largest and most important plants in the country, are sketched as follows:
“The factory operates sporadically. In the (past) nine months, the stoppages amounted to 640,000 man-hours, including 306,000 man-hours completely ‘unutilized’; and in this same period overtime ‘ran to’ 472,000 roubles ... There were great stoppages also on the assembly lines, which led to the unfulfillment of the norms. In August, 33 per cent of the workers did not fulfill their norm.” (Pravda, Oct. 27, 1940)
The columns of Pravda are checkered with similar reports.
From one day to the next, the workers dare not come late – that is a criminal offense – and they must get up earlier, for it is no excuse that the trains are not running on schedule, or the trolleys and buses are overcrowded or unavailable; they must gulp down their food during a lunch “hour” of twenty minutes if they are fortunate enough to get served in the factory dining rooms – and then they must spend hours standing idle because of the inefficient administrators, and, to top it all, work additional hours “overtime.”
“Thirty-three per cent did not fulfill their norm”! – and this despite the enormous overtime, which is carefully translated into roubles to hide the actual lengthening of the working day in this particular plant. But this means that, overtime and all, one-third of the workers failed to earn their minimum meager wage! All of which leaves its impress on the most backward, the most beaten, the most subservient.
Kalinin, the President of the Soviet Union, rounds out the picture.
“Comrades,” he said, addressing the Moscow Party membership, “picture to yourselves, a good engineer. He has studied much; he is an educated man, he is considered a valuable worker. And when you walk into his factory, the Devil himself would break his leg. (Laughter)” (Pravda, October 30, 1940)
A Soviet worker might well ask these gentlemen: If “you” and the Devil himself can expect to break your legs while making a tour of Soviet plants, how do you expect me to raise my productivity, or for that matter, to produce at all under these same conditions? The Soviet worker knows the answer in advance. The audience, embracing not only engineers but directors, heads of trusts, members of the People’s Commissariats, laughs listening to Kalinin; but the response to workers would not be so facetious.
“Any hundred Soviet workers,” wrote Trotsky, “transferred into the conditions, let us say of American industry, after a few months, and even weeks, would probably not fall behind the American workers of a corresponding category. The difficulty lies in the general organisation of labor. The Soviet administrative personnel is, as a general rule, far less equal to the new productive tasks than the workers... The creation of the necessary elementary conditions for this (i.e., the systematic raising of the now very low productivity of labor) demands a raising of the level of administration itself from the shop foreman to the leaders of the Kremlin.”
To raise the level of administration it is necessary to infringe upon the privileges and arbitrary rule of the incumbent self-perpetuating “administrators.” They will cede nothing, not even in the interests of defense. They must first be removed. For this a political revolution is necessary. Mean-While they remain and with them remains the basic obstacle in the path of any further improvement or progress.
Horrible as the conditions are in the factories themselves, the living conditions are, if that is conceivable, still worse. The overwhelming majority of the workers huddle in common dwellings, which in equipment and upkeep are worse than barracks. In 1936 the Soviet press provided the following illustrations:
“Two families live in one room. The roof leaks. When it rains they carry the water out of the room by pail-fuls.”
“The privies are in a disgusting condition.”
“The workers sleep on the floor, since bedbugs eat them up in beds. The chairs are broken; there are no mugs to drink water from, etc.”
In the years which have since elapsed, the “dwellings” and privies have become more dilapidated and more congested. To illustrate 1940 conditions a single passage from Kalinin’s speech will suffice.
“There must be less bedbugs,” thundered Kalinin, “in the apartments in Moscow, etcetera. Bedbugs – why that’s intolerable! That’s a shame! And meanwhile there are people who occupy themselves with the question: What will man be like under Communism? What qualities will distinguish him? (Laughter)” (loc. cit.)
“In Moscow, etcetera”! If apartments in Moscow are as Kalinin crudely but graphically puts it Klopovniki (bedbug nurseries), it is not difficult, although nauseating, to imagine what the conditions are in the “etcetera,” i.e., elsewhere under Stalin’s “transition to communism.”
In the supply of daily necessities, the law which operates from plan to plan in Soviet economy is: the closer to the mass consumer the worse the quality. Kalinin has the floor again:
“It is necessary to say openly that we are very dissatisfied with the quality of many of our products. And the characteristic thing is that each of us swears whenever an object of poor quality gets into his hands. We ourselves, however, never wonder about the kind of products other people get from us.”
And why do “we” never wonder?
In Kalinin’s opinion the reason is purely psychological, and to be explained by a mental quirk of “leaders of production.” “How did many of them reason as a rule?” asks Kalinin, deftly changing the pronoun from “we” to “they.”
“They reasoned,” he continues, “this way. Is it worth while stirring up scandals, sharpening relations with social organizations, quarrelling with comrades etcetera? An object, even if defective, will pass among the masses. And it did pass. Such an attitude to defective goods has sunk its roots deeply into our production.” (loc. cit.)
No wonder Pravda decided to print this speech of October 2 only on October 30. In spite of four weeks’ careful editing, the content speaks for itself.
To obtain a minimum of necessities, Soviet workers, even the skilled, have to expend many extra hours. It is not so much a question of standing in line before the shops, as it is a question of raising “their own” cows, pigs, chickens, tending vegetable patches, etc. They will have to intensify this labor too.
Under the added pressure of war-time conditions, the shortage of foodstuffs is growing more and more acute. In October, the price of bread was increased 15 per cent in Moscow and Leningrad.
The authorities are engaged in winter time in a campaign to foster and extend “auxiliary economies” to every enterprise by next Spring.
“Old auxiliary economies, which have long remained outside the field of vision of leaders of enterprises are being reestablished,” boasts Pravda. “New ones are being organized ... Up to now, the workers in Volodarsky Plant,” continues Pravda, citing a model, “grew only potatoes. They are now preparing to plant in the Spring onions, beets, cabbages and other garden staples as well; they will raise early vegetables.” (Pravda, October 14, 1940.)
Pravda also advises, as a relaxation in leisure hours, the establishment and care by workers of dairies, pig and chicken farms, stocking fish in suitable ponds, and so forth and so on. Apparently, only the rabbits, so hotly advocated during the-famine in the first Five Year Plan, are missing.
“What a terrible robbery of human power... and what a burden of medieval digging in manure and in the earth they lay upon the workers, and yet more upon his wife and children” (Trotsky).
 
The June 26, 1940, Laws
By the time the Kremlin convinced itself that Stakhanovism and the December 1938 legislation were two more exploded triumphs, World War No.2 had broken out. In addition to cutting deeply into foreign trade and the supply of indispensable materials and machinery from abroad, the war made it necessary, especially after the Finnish experience, to divert more plants to production of munitions and armaments. Many machines installed previously had become outworn and outdated, an equal if not greater number were damaged during the reckless drive for records, let alone the damage from inexperienced and careless handling. The problems of labor productivity, and defense, always inseparable, were posed more imperiously than ever before. Stalin’s answer was to convert the Soviet enterprises and institutions into virtual prisons.
Petronius relates how in Nero’s time the upstart slaveholders, former freedmen drunk with power, used to hang a. tablet over the gates of their establishments with this inscription:
What servant goes forth without his master’s command be shall receive an hundred stripes.
The Kremlin Nero has inscribed over every factory, plant, mine and office – the June 26 ukase.
The ukase not only lengthens the working day, and cuts wages, but makes it a criminal offense for anyone to quit his job. The penalty for “self-willed departure” is the GPU dungeon. Skipping a day’s work, or tardiness, is punishable by penal-labor terms to be served at the place of employment, plus a fine up to 25 per cent of the wages.
The previous vast migration of labor had provided a safety valve for the regime, although the Kremlin was of course unaware of it. Only unemployment drains and demoralizes human beings more than does the incessant, futile search for a slight improvement of one’s lot. Unquestionably, thousands upon thousands of Russian workers, especially among the older generation and those with families, became human rags – their moral fiber torn to tatters in this chase after their daily bread and a less infested place to sleep.
Now, however, the mass of the Russian workers are being held by force in the factories. They have already served six months of their life-term imprisonment. Their sentence carries with it ever greater speed-up, worse and worse conditions, lower wages, longer hours. Within these new prison walls, they will for the first time in years really get to know one another. Their children driven from the schools by another ukase abolishing free schooling, drafted into a conscript labor force, have been enslaved together with them. At every step, at every moment whether awake or asleep, the wasteful, arrogant, ruthless vampire-bureaucracy unveils itself before the masses as their oppressor-jailer. The most advanced capitalist countries have as yet to devise a jail from which men have not planned escape and – succeeded.
The intimate connection between the 1940 purge of the trade unions, the June 26 legislation, and the resistance of the workers, was confirmed by Pravda itself four months later:
“It is still impermissible to say that our trade union organizations have done everything in their power to successfully enforce the June 26 ukase. It is not only a question of the fact that in the first weeks of the enforcement of the ukase certain trade union organizations did not cooperate in exposing the laggards and their patrons, but sometimes themselves patronized the laggards ... But the question is this, that certain trade union organizations up to now still carry on very superficial educational work ... The entire mass trade union work has been reduced in many instances to conducting flying meetings, and readings of the ukase.” (Pravda, Oct. 9, 1940. My emphasis)
The officially acknowledged figure for the 1940 trade union purge was 128,000 trade union officials out of a reported total of 203,821. Why not abolish the trade unions altogether, as a public nuisance? Stalin no doubt wishes he could.
If in the period of Stakhanovism the organ of the trade unions spoke of the “class” struggle, then today the titular head of the Soviet government, the President of the USSR, comments as follows on the June 26 laws:
“...The class struggle at the present time is taking place in a different direction. The struggle for the highest productivity of labor – this at the given moment is one of the main directions of the class struggle.” (Kalinin’s speech On Communist Upbringing, Pravda, October 30)
 
The Official Balance Sheet
In January 1936 when the dizziest claims of success were being made and when Stakhanovism was envisaged as a panacea, Molotov cautiously acknowledged: “Our average level of productivity... is still considerably below that of America and Europe.” Molotov abstained from specifying the extent of the discrepancy. Official figures since published clearly establish that Soviet labor productivity remains below one-fourth, and in many cases one-tenth of the corresponding labor productivity in advanced capitalist countries.
Despite the expansion of mechanization – the capital outlay for the Third Five Year Plan is greater than the combined totals for both of the previous plans – this discrepancy has become more pronounced since 1936. Kalinin, who has long refrained from speaking publicly on important issues, blurted out: “Have we greatly raised the productivity of labor in our country? I wouldn’t say that we have achieved too great results in this connection.” (Pravda, Oct. 30, 1940)
Kalinin is merely echoing his superiors. On his lips this admission of bankruptcy is all the more damning.
It is not hard to understand why the Stakhanov movement and the December 1938 laws met with resistance on the part of the workers. With conditions in factories and living conditions remaining unaltered, all the Kremlin’s measures meant only a further degradation of the masses. Instead of diminishing, the labor turnover increased. It expressed the most elementary and immediate form of mass resistance. Stalin has cut off this safety-valve, and thereby has entered into the stage of an open struggle with the working class. No other road of resistance now remains. The bureaucracy stands face to face with its mortal enemy.
 
The Soviet Working Class
PECULIARITIES OF HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT: From its very inception under Czarism the Russian working class developed at a very explosive tempo, reflecting the rapid growth of Russian industry. The revolutionary movement in Czarist Russia had its roots precisely in this tempo of Russia’s economic development prior to 1917.
 
ACCELERATION OF THE PROCESS: With the overthrow of Czarism, and especially with the inception of planned production, the formation of the working class proceeded at tempos unequalled in any other country. The vast scope of the industrialization of the Soviet Union is expressed in the growth of its urban population. In the twelve years which elapsed between the last two censuses, the Soviet urban population advanced from 26.3 million (December, 1926) to 55.9 million (January, 1939), an increase of 29.6 million, i.e., more than doubled.
 
COMPARISON WITH GROWTH IN THE UNITED STATES: The most rapid expansion of the urban population in the United States took place in the first quarter of our century, when the urban population grew from 30.3 million in 1900 to 54.3 million in 1920, an increase of 24 million in twenty years, considerably below the figure for the Soviet Union, although the growth in America took two decades, i.e. almost twice as long.
The comparative tempos of Soviet and U.S. growth are juxtaposed in the table below:



TABLE I
GROWTH OF THE URBAN POPULATION IN THE SOVIET UNION
(Computed from official Soviet data)




Year


Total Number
of Years


Total
Increase


Average Annual
Growth




Pre-Plan period
(Dec. ’26–Jan. ’29)


  2


  1.3 million


0.65 million




First 6-Year Plan
(Jan. ’29–Jan. ’33)


  4


12.7 million


3.18 million




Second 6-Year Plan
(Jan. ’33–Jan. ’39)


  6


15.6 million


2.6   million




TOTAL


12


29.6 million


2.5   million




 




IN THE UNITED STATES
(from figures in the Statistical Abstracts of the United States)




Decade 1900–1910


10


11.8 million


1.2   million




Decade 1910–1920


10


12.2 million


1.22 million




Years 1920–1925


  5


8.5 million


1.7   million




TOTAL


25


32.5 million


1.3   million



The urban population in the Soviet Union which recorded only a slight increase, 1.3 million in two years (1927 and 1928) makes an astounding leap of 12.7 million in the next four years of the actual unfolding of the First Five Year Plan, and in the six following years registers an even greater growth of 15.6 million. The Soviet development is represented by a steep, almost vertically rising curve. In the United States on the other hand, despite the fact that the movement from farms to cities was swelled by tens of millions of immigrants from Europe, the far more gradual development is represented by an almost horizontal line. The two tempos cut at right angles to each other. The difference between the ratios of growth is not quantitative but qualitative. It reflects the abyss between the respective foundations of the two social systems.
 
THE NUMBER OF PEASANTS INVOLVED: The growth of the urban population in the Soviet Union occurred primarily through the movement of peasants to the cities. History knows of no comparable migration from rural areas into modern industrial centers. The statistics relating to this movement are one of the secrets of the regime. Nevertheless it is possible to arrive at an approximate estimate: Not less than twenty million participated in this mass migration, the actual number probably being in excess of that estimate.
Indicative as this growth is of the profoundly accelerated transformation in the country’s economic and social structure, there remains an additional and more significant indicator: The growth of the Soviet working class – the sole significant section of world labor that has expanded in the era of capitalist decay – considerably surpasses in tempo the volcanic growth of the urban population. The importance of that cannot be exaggerated. The table below supplies the available data:



TABLE II




 


At the beginning
of 1st 6-year Plan
(1929)


At the beginning
of 2nd 5-year Plan
(1933)


At the beginning
of 3rd 5-year Plan
(1939)




Soviet Urban Population (in millions)


27.6


40.3


     55.9     




Total number of workers and employees (in millions)


12.2


22.3


     29.5 [1]




Increase in Urban Population (in millions)


  1.3


12.7


     15.6     




Increase in number of Workers and Employees (in millions)


not given


10.1


       7.2     
 



WHAT THESE FIGURES MEAN: The tempo of development disclosed by these figures is almost incredible, especially in the eyes of the apologists of capitalism. In the last decade eleven out of every twenty inhabitants of urban communities have been employed in industrial enterprises or state institutions, that is, the overwhelming majority of able-bodied adults. This condition, which has prevailed since the inception of planned production, must become more accentuated in the period immediately ahead, because of the institution of child labor that has now been begun by abolishing free education. It is without precedent in the history of modern industry and modern cities. Thus the numerical growth of the working class is overshadowed by its far more dominant economic and social weight in the country. The term Soviet working class is today synonymous with the term Soviet City.
 
CONDITIONS IN THE PERIOD OF THE FIRST FIVE YEAR PLAN (1929-1933): From 1929 to 1933, the urban population grew by 12.7 million while the working class expanded by 10.1 million. The two figures are so close as to be almost identical. It means that approximately sixteen out of every twenty new urban inhabitants were absorbed by industry in the period of the First Five Year Plan. Therefore, both the growth of the urban population and the growth of the working class took place almost exclusively at the expense of the villages. The peasants were uprooted from the soil and flocked into the cities. Peasant adults and youth composed the bulk of 10.1 million absorbed in industry in 1929–1933. At the beginning of the Second Five Year Plan these new recruits constituted almost half the proletarian army of 22.3 million in the Soviet Union. Because of the unprecedented tempo of its formation the Soviet working class was thus less homogeneous than any other in modern times. The lack of homogeneity of the basic class, the flooding of its ranks with semi-proletarians and peasants, whose outlook is poles apart from that of workers, plus the lack of revolutionary experience among the younger generation of workers, plus the officially fostered illusions of miracles shortly to be achieved – all this, against the background of international defeats of the working class, provided the most potent lever for the stabilization of the Stalin regime.
 
THE CONNECTION BETWEEN STALIN’S POLICIES IN 1929–1933 AND THE EXPANDING INDUSTRY’S NEED OF LABOR: A more harmonious development of Soviet industry, adjusted to the conditions in the country, and especially concerned with raising the material well-being of the masses, would have absorbed ever greater numbers from the country through the automatic growth of manufacture, the development of transportation facilities, the improvement in living and working conditions, shorter hours of labor, better educational facilities, the lure of companionship and amusements, and the general superiorities and conveniences of modern industrial centers as against the rural communities. Such a development, however, was precluded because of the false, ruinous policies and regime of the Kremlin. Industry was expanded at a reckless and adventuristic tempo, in part to make up for the “tortoise tempos” of the preceding opportunist economic policies. The shortage of labor immediately manifested itself and became so acute that Stalin – he then made speeches – had personally to call attention to it. In the light of the recent Draconic legislation, it is by no means far-fetched to conclude that Stalin deliberately intensified his policy of “forced collectivization” – which cost Soviet economy so dearly and which took a toll of millions of peasant lives – precisely in order to drive the peasants into the cities.
 
CONDITIONS IN THE PERIOD OF THE SECOND FIVE YEAR PLAN: In 1933–1939, the working class increased by 7.2 million while the urban population leaped by 15.6 million. Undoubtedly the greater part of this increase in the early years of the Second Five Year Plan still reflected the flow of the peasants into the cities because of forced collectivization. Only nine out of every twenty new urban inhabitants were absorbed in industry in this period. Under Soviet conditions, this drop implied on the one hand the monstrous swelling of bureaucratic ranks – the fleshpots in the center are the Mecca of every functionary in the provinces – and, on the other, the reduced influx of peasants into urban centers where only degradation awaits them. The vast migration of labor acted to spread to the far-flung corners of the Union the news of intolerable conditions in industry. The peasants in increasing numbers preferred to remain on land, not because conditions there had vastly improved, as is the official claim, but because conditions in cities had worsened to such an extent that in recent years a movement has taken place in the opposite direction, i.e., from the cities to the country, especially during spring and summer months when laborers in the collective farms are at a premium.
“It is well-known that in the spring and summer months the Don Basin (Soviet coal producing center) and other basins usually sharply reduced their output because of the seasonal ebb of the labor force.” (Pravda, October 29, 1940.)
Stalin chose the month of June to promulgate his 1940 laws precisely to prevent a section of workers from drifting back to the villages.
The new recruits to the working class in this period (1933-1939) numbered approximately 7.2 million, as against a total working class of 29.5 million, whereas in the preceding period (1929-1933) the new forces comprised 10.1 million out of a total working class of 22.3 million. Most of these 7.2 million newly added workers were peasants and peasant youth. However, the proportion of raw elements had dropped to less than one-fourth as against almost one-half the total labor force at the inception of planned production.
 
The Soviet Working Class Today
The working class still remains very heterogeneous. But the core of the proletarians and semi-proletarians today far outweighs the more backward strata not only socially but numerically. A profound change has taken place in the course of the last ten years.
The bulk of the 10.1 million peasants who went into industry during the First Five Year Plan have now behind them not less than six, and in many instances, as much as ten years of proletarianization. These vast bodies of men, women and children who were driven from the most backward rural areas into the environment of modern industry – and Stalinism; who then together with others swarmed across the land in search of less intolerable working and living conditions, have passed through a great and terrible experience. They know and hate the regime.
There is another equally striking and important fact about the Soviet working class. It is the youngest proletariat in history not only in point of formation, but that of age itself. Trotsky pointed out that in 1936 there were seven million workers under twenty-three – 3,140,000 in industry; 700,000 in railroads, 700,000 in the building trades. “In the new giant factories,” he added, “about half the workers are young.” The oldest among them are today under twenty-seven.
The trend toward absorbing more and more youth in industry was further accentuated in the next four years. And now, by ukase of October 2, 1940, Stalin ‘has drafted children and adolescents from 14–17 years into industry. The fact that a significant section of the proletariat consists of the youth can tip the scales decisively in determining the fate of the Russian proletariat, and the Soviet Union.
The Kremlin stands in mortal fear of the youth. In April 1936 the Komsomol (Russian YCL) was liquidated as a political body, and the youth forbidden to participate in any manner whatever in political life. Stalin feared lest the Komsomol turn into a rival political party.
Commenting on the political expropriation of the youth, Trotsky wrote:
“In 1894 the Russian autocracy through the lips of the young Czar Nicholas II answered the Zemstvos which were timidly dreaming of participating in political life with the famous words: ‘Meaningless fancies!’ In 1936 the Soviet bureaucracy answered the as yet vague claims of the younger generation with the still ruder cry: ‘Stop your chatter!’ Those words, too, will become historical. The regime of Stalin may pay no less dear for them than the regime headed by Nicholas II.”
In October 1940 the proletarian and peasant youth was expropriated culturally and socially by being driven from Soviet schools and universities to form a labor reserve. The coming months may well bring with them a verification of Trotsky’s prognosis.
All political and social processes in the Soviet Union take place today in the conditions and atmosphere of the second imperialist world holocaust War speeds up all processes in the extreme. War is the supreme test of a regime. In wartime the masses become most sensitive. Days arrive in history, as Marx said, which concentrate in themselves ten, even twenty years. This applies not only to the masses struggling toward consciousness under capitalism but also to the Soviet workers under Stalin. The tiniest flicker of mass upsurge anywhere on the periphery must react with ten-fold force in the white-hot Soviet atmosphere. Stalin is as aware and afraid of this as are Hitler, Churchill, Roosevelt, et al.
In each new ukase, which surpasses the ferocity of the one before, the Kremlin really voices its alarm. Fear creeps into official pronouncements. In a long article intended as an Aid to Propagandists and Agitators Pravda warns that unless the ukases are fulfilled “the entire cause of completing the building of classless society and the transition to the highest phase of communism may be threatened.” (Pravda, Oct. 14 – My emphasis)
Kalinin expressed the same alarm much more bluntly and crudely:
“One of two things: either we are building Communism or we are only talking about Communism, while we ourselves move toward Communism slowly and, if it is permissible to say so, waddle along, stretching and yawning. But bear in mind that it is very risky to move towards Communism in this way. It is possible to protract too long the transition to Communism in this way. (Pravda, Oct. 30 – My emphasis)
Stalin is obviously introducing an amendment to his theory of “socialism in one country” and its “irrevocable” triumph.
The Russo-Japanese war led to the revolution of 1905. The participation of Czarism in the first world war terminated in October 1917. Stalin fears that this continuity in the origin and development of the Russian revolution may repeat itself in the second world war, for the outbreak of which he bears, no small responsibility.
 
The “Passivity” of the Masses
The Russian working class amply demonstrated the dynamic powers lodged in it not only under Czarism and in 1917 but in the years that followed. Although composing a small proportion of the population, with its own ranks diluted by 30–40 per cent, by peasant influxes during the war, the Russian working class proved capable of overthrowing the bourgeoisie when the correct program and a capable, loyal leadership were offered them. It is not known just how many proletarian fighters fell on the battlefields of the Civil War; but unquestionably the flower of the class died defending the new fortress of the world proletariat It was this decimated working class that carried the Soviet Union through the terrible years of reconstruction, when the newly born Workers’ Republic literally tottered on the brink of an abyss, when the country’s economic structure was disrupted to an extent unmatched in modern times by the years of imperialist war, civil war, Allied intervention and blockade. Despite Stalin, and against the Stalinist regime, the Soviet working class, carried through on their shoulders the entire burden, first of the NEP, and then of the Plans, attaining incontestable and. staggering successes, the credit for which the Kremlin oligarchy has usurped just as it usurped the conquests of October.. All this was achieved in the most reacti9onary epoch in modern history.
If the Soviet working class remained “passive,” i.e., failed in this period to overthrow Stalinism, it was not owing to the extreme heterogeneity of the class or the inhuman efforts that had to be expended in attaining these world-historic conquests, but only because they received no help from the outside. The leaders of the Second and Third Internationals, strangled one revolutionary movement after another throughout the world, and finally, with the aid of the anarchists, drowned the Spanish revolution in blood – and ushered in the war. Each defeat struck at and was felt most heavily by the Soviet working class.
Misleaders and turncoats always unload their own responsibility, betrayals, and crimes on the “passivity” or “immaturity” of the masses. But in every single case the masses, have given all they could give. Above all, this is true of the Russian masses. For the list of the achievements of the Soviet proletariat is not exhausted by the facts recited above. Another important, if not the most important, conquest must be included: The political struggle, as heroic as any in history and conducted under repressions unprecedented in the labor movement, of its proletarian vanguard; the struggle waged by the Left Opposition from 1923-1929, and then continued in exile; the struggle which led to the founding of the Fourth International, and still goes on today.
The tremendous role played in history by defeated revolutionary movements invariably escapes the notice of Philistines. They see only “victories” and this, long after they have been achieved. The role and importance of the defeated Paris Commune was understood and appraised by Marx and Engels. Lenin and Trotsky understood the significance of the Moscow uprising of the proletariat in 1905. All the Plekhanovs were only able to lament it as a “mistake,” something that should and could have been avoided. Yet the victory of 1917 was made possible only because the lessons of the 1905 defeat were learned, assimilated and applied by the vanguard of the Russian proletariat. Any liberal, any professor, any scribbler can repeat it today as “concrete” truth. Beyond the vision of all professors and their disciples, however, is the vital importance of the “defeated” struggle of the Left Opposition and the struggles of its heir, the Fourth International.
To be sure, the fruition of the “defeated” struggle could not have been realized in a period of reaction and defeats, when every developing movement was crushed in blood by the opponents of Marxism, by pseudo-Marxists and their allies. Nonetheless the “defeat” of the Russian Opposition will have its realization, just as the defeat of 1905 was consummated by the victory of 1917.
In the arsenal of world labor, and of the Soviet workers in particular, the great tradition, the vital lessons and program of this struggle, conducted in its initial stages by the isolated Soviet vanguard under Trotsky’s leadership, constitutes the most powerful force on the road of mankind’s emancipation.
In the period of the first two Five Year Plans, the Soviet workers posted signs in factories: “Hands off Our Wages!” and hung portraits of Leon Trotsky above them. They are now beginning to seek a more eloquent language in which to address the masters in the Kremlin. Stalin’s GPU murdered Trotsky. But Trotsky’s program will cut its way through to the Soviet masses because it is the only key with which the gates of their prison can be unlocked.

Footnote
1. The last available figure is that issued in 1938, which sets the total for 1937 at 27.8 million. To arrive at an estimate for 1939 I have added to this figure the average annual increase in the labor force in the last few years, namely 1.7 million. Such an estimate in view of the retarded growth of the labor force (this aspect will be dealt with presently) is not very far from the actual one.



Stalin issued last October a set of ukases whereby: 1) Soviet children of 14–17 were made subject to draft into a conscript labor force; 2) the right to education so solemnly “guaranteed” by the Stalin Constitution was abolished without a formal constitutional amendment, or consultation of the Supreme Council of the U.S.S.R. On November 10, 1940, three days after they had celebrated the Twenty Third Anniversary of the October revolution, 350,000 children of 14 and 15, and 250,000 youngsters of 16 and 17 were drafted as the first contingent.
Under Lenin: “All school children must be supplied with food, clothing, footwear, textbooks and other school accessories at the expense of the state.” (Section IV Paragraph 80, Program of the Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks) adopted at the Eighth Party Congress, March 18–23, 1919) Under Stalin: Tuitions have been introduced into Soviet schools – to drive the children from the school rooms into the factories.
No official news of this has appeared in the Daily Worker. “Unofficial” periodicals like Soviet Russia Today have been assigned the task of covering up in this country the exploitation of child labor outlawed under Lenin and Trotsky and re-established under Stalin. “The first 600,000 Soviet youth,” writes Jessica Smith, “enrolled in the newly organized State Labor Reserves schools began their period of training and study ...” (Soviet Russia Today, January 1941) This opening sentence with its vista of “schools,” “training,” “study,” “enrollment” is of a piece with the rest of the article – a web of impudent and cynical lies. Most of these children have already been thrown into industry and are “studying” in coal and iron mines, in basic plants and large-scale industries, in the heaviest and most dangerous occupations.
 
What This “Schooling” Really Is
On the very first day of the draft, P. Moskatov, head of the special Labor Reserves Administration wrote a special article.
“It is very important,” he warned, “to assign in advance work places and to prepare the organization of the training process for those Tride Schools and Factory and Shop Instruction Courses (F.Z.O.) whose industrial schooling will take place directly in the enterprises themselves (metallurgical plants, coal mines)” (Pravda, November 10, 1940)
That speaks for itself.
Apart from “Trade Schools” and “Factory and Shop Instruction Courses” (F.Z.O.), referred to by Moskatov, there are also the “Railroad Schools” to which 35,606 have been assigned, i.e., less than 6 per cent of the total.
Factory and Shop Instruction Courses (FZO). embrace 250,000 youngsters of 16 and 17. Their working day is fixed at eight hours a day. Article 9 of Order No. 1 issued by the Labor Reserves Administration, and countersigned by P. Moskatov, reads: “The length of the school day in the Factory, and Shop Instruction Courses (F.Z.O.) is fixed at eight hours.” (Pravda, October 5, 1940) But – an innocent or gullible reader may object – a school, day of 8 hours is one thing, and an 8-hour working day is something else again. Not in Stalin’s language! “In the F.Z.O.” writes the same Moskatov, “according to the entire program 118 hours are allotted for instruction at place of work and the remaining 1,138 hours:– for productive, work under the guidance of the masterworkman (foreman).” (Pravda, November 10, 1940)
Clearly, this means one thing and one thing only: Everyone of the 250,000 youngsters who have been “enrolled” in the F.Z.O. for six months, i.e. 26 weeks (and who then will be required to work four years as conscript laborers) will receive during their training less than five hours a week “instruction at place of work” (118 divided by 26). The rest of the time must be spent in “productive work.” As is well known, it actually takes about 5 hours a week to instruct a child – or any new worker for that matter – how to function productively in a mine or plant.
Just how many of the 315,000 boys of 14 and 15 – only males have been drafted as yet – who come under the other category of “Trade School Students” (and who are “enrolled” for 1–2 years before serving 4 years more) will be assigned at once to industry remains one of the Kremlin’s dark secrets. As Moskatov clearly states, however, the plan is to do precisely that. Their “school-day” is fixed at 7 hours – “5 hours productive training and 2 hours for general education and special discipline.” (Pravda, October 5)
A 5-hour working day for children of 14 and 15 in coal mines, and metallurgical industries! An 8-hour day for those 16 and 17! Those not sent directly into large-scale industry will produce in “special” workshops.
 
How These Children Will Be Robbed
But that is not all. The Kremlin parasites intend not only to exploit child labor but to underpay these children and thus drive still lower the wages of adult workers. “Students” will receive one-third of the prevailing wages.
Article 19 of Order No. 1 issued by the Labor Reserves Administration reads:
“Trade Schools, Railroad Schools, and the F.Z.O. are permitted to fulfill elementary productive orders for the state. It is hereby established that one-third of the revenues accruing from the fulfillment of these orders as well as for the work done by the students during their training in, industry is assigned to the state budget; one-third remains at the disposal of the Director for expanding the schools and the F.Z.O. and for supplying the cultural and living needs of students, master-workmen (foremen) and instructors; and one-third is to be given into the hands of the students fulfilling the work.” (Pravda, October 5)
Even the “Railroad Students” will be assigned to perform “elementary” productive tasks – at one-third the wages!
Stalin’s pen-prostitutes of both sexes, who try to throw sand in the eyes of American workers, feel so immune as to boast that the Soviet children (who have been driven from the real schools and institutions by the introduction of tuitions) are not asked to pay for this “education”! “The students in those schools are supported wholly by the government. Tuition and maintenance including housing, bedding equipment, food and transportation are free ...” (Soviet Russia Today, January 1941)
But the editors of Soviet Russia Today dare not quote from the official decrees to substantiate these vile boasts. Let us juxtapose to their lies the Kremlin’s legal text.
 
What the “Students” Will Get
Article 12 of Order Number 1 of the Labor Reserves Administration follows:
“The students (FZO) are provided at the expense of the state with their food, bedding, spetz-odezhda (specialists-clothing); and those from rural regions and out of town are also provided with housing.” (Pravda, October 5)
Note that Stalin did not even make a pretence of listing “school accessories” or “equipment.” Let us examine the three items which are designated: 1) spetz-odezhda; 2) food; 3) bedding and housing.
What is “specialists-clothing” (spetz odezhda)? This high-falluting label is intended to evoke visions of hats, shoes, gloves, socks, coats, overcoats, etc. To be precise, it means work-clothes. To be still more precise, it is nothing but a miserable pair of overalls, or an ordinary apron.
Food – that is indeed free – if and when supplied in dining rooms and kitchens. This, as we shall presently see, cannot be taken for granted.
As for housing and bedding only out-of-towners, it will be observed, are assured of lodgings – on paper. The “natives” must shift for themselves. And not they alone.
In Moscow, for example, 74,600 children were drafted, but only 25,000 will be housed at government expense. Report of the Moscow City Committee (five days before the draft):
“Out of the required 25,000 beds, only 9,000 have been prepared.” (Pravda, Nov. 5)
Report from Yaroslavl:
“Preparations for opening of the schools proceeding poorly ... Not a single place for housing has been prepared or arranged for ... There are not enough beds or bedding ... One doesn’t even hear any discussion about providing fire-wood for the schools, equipping the dining rooms and kitchens.” (idem)
Report from the city of Ridder (during the draft itself):
“Nobody knows what trades will be taught in the schools. Workshops are not being prepared; there are no lodgings, either.” (Pravda, Nov. 12)
Report from Leningrad (Nov. 12):
“However, the schools and institutions have not yet been completely equipped with living quarters.”
Comment by B. Moskatov:
“Certain Executive Committees of local Soviets fire likewise approaching very light-mindedly the selection of buildings for the new schools. In Podolsk, for example, it was planned to use a grain bin for housing.” (Pravda, Nov. 10)
 
A Picture of Chaos and of Bureaucracy
Report from Chita:
“It was decided to select an apartment house that is being built for the school building. But as yet only the walls of the first story have been raised; The second story is being completed poorly and will hardly be ready by December 1. And where will the students live? Who will be the director of the school? What equipment must the schools have? There is. nobody who can even answer these questions.” (Pravda, Nov. 12)
Pravda, November 13:
“We have received a telegram from Voronezh that the leaders of Glavpiebelprom have proposed to the Borsk combine that it take over for the school a building which is threatening to cave in.”
Pravda’s comment:
“These managers apparently think that, laws are hot written for them. Will it really be necessary for the prosecutors to teach these people how to fulfill Soviet laws?” (Pravda, Nov. 13)
This is how the children are being lodged, fed and maintained “wholly by the government”! Similar data could be adduced at will. Suffice it to quote in conclusion Pravda’s own summary of the situation:
In a number of places housing is lacking and suitable buildings are not even being looked for. These signals testify to this, that in a number of places the enormous state importance of preparing labor reserves is not being appreciated, and that certain workers are obviously violating discipline and not fulfilling government directives.” (Pravda, November 12)
We know what Pravda means by “a number of places” and “certain workers.” It means everywhere; it means every bureaucrat – from the satraps in Moscow and Leningrad to the pettiest scoundrel in the provinces. It means that the children are being subjected to working and living conditions even more inhuman than those endured by the adult workers.
 



On the occasion of the Twenty-Third Anniversary of the October Revolution, Stalin prohibited the raising of a single anti-fascist slogan in the Soviet Union. Likewise taboo were any and all anti-war or anti-imperialist slogans. As a matter of fact, the mere mention of fascism, war, imperialism, victims of fascism, colonial peoples, class-war prisoners, refugees, was proscribed. In the 42 official slogans issued by the Kremlin for the November 7th celebrations, capitalism itself, let alone the bourgeoisie, is not referred to directly.
The sole mention of the world situation was contained in the following slogan: “Long Live the Foreign Policy of the Soviet Government! The policy of Peace Between Peoples and Assuring the Security of Our Fatherland!” In other words: Long Live the Hitler-Stalin pact!
Even such a ritualistic slogan repeated for years as “Long Live the Soviet Power in the Whole World!” was omitted in 1940.
In 1935, at the beginning of the “People’s Front” policy – remember? – the slogans issued by Stalin for the Eighteenth Anniversary included: “Our Flaming Greetings to the Proletarians and Toilers of France, the Vanguard Fighters Against Fascism, Against Imperialist War!” In 1940 – silence?
Also, in 1935, “Bolshevik Greetings to the Revolutionary Proletariat of Germany! Long Live the Heroic Communist Party of Germany! Long Live Comrade THAELMANN! Let Us Tear Him From the Clutches of the Fascist Hangmen!” In 1940, the Kremlin was too busy shaking the hands of Fascist diplomats to worry about Thaelmann, the German Communist Party, the Spanish people, or any other victims of Stalin’s treacherous and fatal policies.
In 1935 the Kremlin, while selling oil to Mussolini’, still remembered to send greetings to the “Popular Masses of Abyssinia, Courageously Defending Their Independence.” China then received two greetings: 1) “Fraternal Greetings to the Heroic Working Class and all the Toiling Masses of China. Long Live the Communist Party of China!”; 2) “The Imperialists are Dividing and Enslaving China! Greetings to the Chinese People Fighting for Their Emancipation and Independence!” In 1940, the colonial peoples are beneath the Kremlin’s notice.
In 1935 so many slogans against Fascism were launched that to really do them justice we would have to reprint entire issues of Pravda (not to mention the Daily Worker). Let the following suffice: “Fascism is the Most Savage Offensive of Capitalism Against the Toiling Masses!”; “Fascism – this Means War of Aggression!”; “Fascism – This Means Hunger, Poverty, Misery!”; “Down With Fascism! Down With Capitalism!”; “Fuse Into a Single United Front For the Struggle Against Fascism – The Bitterest Enemy of AU Peoples!” and so forth, and so on. In 1940 – silence.
What, then, was the content of the 42 slogans of the Kremlin in 1940? It was mostly “greetings.” Thus, the workers, engineers and technicians of Ferrous and Non-Ferrous Metallurgy received greetings with an injunction: “Fight to Increase the Production of Metal! Fight for its Quality!” The workers, engineers, etc. of the Machine Building Industry were greeted: – More and Better Machinery! Workers, etc. of the Fuel and Electric Industries – More and Better Fuel! More and Better Electric Energy! Workers, etc. of the Chemical industry – More Chemicals! Workers, etc. of the Building Trades, Build More and Better, and Cheaper! Workers, etc. of the Light and Textile Industries – “More Calico, Silk, Cloth, Knitgoods, Footwear, and Clothing for the Citizens of the Soviet Land!” Workers, etc. of State and Cooperative Trade Network – “Better Service to the Soviet Consumer!” “Fight For Cultural Soviet Trade in City and Country!” Etcetera. (Pravda, November 4, 1940)
Nor were the collective farmers forgotten. They got greetings, too, with orders for bigger and better crops, and, in particular, more meat.
 
A Few Stiff Demands Are Incorporated
Another set of slogans dispensed with greetings and simply raised “demands”: 1) “Create Mighty State Labor Reserves for Industry and Transport!” In other words, Long Live the October 2nd Laws Instituting Child Labor in the Soviet Union! 2) “The Struggle Against Laggards and Disorganizers of Production is the Struggle for Strengthening the Might of Our Fatherland and Its Red Army. Long Live Labor Discipline and Exemplary Order in the Enterprises of Our Fatherland!” In other words, the workers were told to give three cheers for the June 26 labor laws which enslaved them, and which they are bitterly opposing.
The list of “Long-Live” slogans is too long to exhaust. A few will suffice:

Long Live the Soviet Trade Unions! (purged in July)
Long Live the Komsomols! (purged in July)
Long Live Our Working Class! (chained to the factories)
Long Live the Collective Peasantry! (failed to fulfill quotas of grain deliveries to the state)
Long Live the Soviet Intellectuals! (now being purged)
Long Live the Communist Party of the Soviet Union! (now being purged, with the mass purge scheduled to be consummated by February 15, 1941, when the Eighteenth Party Conference convenes)
 

Two Significant Slogans to Examine
There are, however, two slogans among the 42 that merit special, notice. First, there is the rather unexpected and sudden reference to “Our Socialist Espionage Service – the CHEKA,” in connection with a slogan which calls for the strengthening of the Red Army. The Cheka, as is well known, was originally organized in the period of the Civil War. The Kremlin’s secret police were first labelled the GPU and then renamed the NKVD because the other name had become so abhorrent. Why this return in 1940 to the Cheka? Is it to strike greater terror among the populace? Or is it a direct threat that policeterror is to be intensified and supplemented by martial courts? Undoubtedly, both the one and the other.
The second slogan follows verbatim:
“Let Us Unfold the Criticism of Our Inadequacies! Let Us Strengthen Still More the Might and Organized Power of Our State!”
Now, on the surface this may seem only an innocuous incantation of Stalin’s “Bolshevik Self-Criticism” – but it is nothing of the sort. This ominous slogan quite clearly demands a greater centralization of power, and a further “strengthening” of the totalitarian apparatus. All “criticism” has been “unfolding” precisely in this direction. The coming weeks will reveal just how Stalin proposes to reinforce in his own two hands the “Might and Organized Power of Our State.”
 




Maxim Litvinov has been expelled from the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. Public notice has been served on Premier and Commissar of Foreign Affairs Molotov (by the purge of his wife) and to Commissar of Railways and former brother-in-law of Stalin, L. Kaganovich (by the censure of his brother, former Defense Industries Commissar M. Kaganovich), that the ashcan is ready for them. Six out of 72 members of the Central, Committee and 15 out of 68 alternates have been purged, and nine members expelled from the Centra! Auditing Commission. On this the 18th Party Conference has, of course, set its “unanimous” seal of approval.
In Stalin’s system, all failures are “accounted” for by scapegoats. Each of those purged or censured symbolizes a major catastrophe of the Kremlin regime.
With the sole exception of Litvinov, the various dignitaries involved in the purge held high posts not only in the party but in the key Peoples’ Commissariats. The crisis convulsing the economy controlled by these Commissariats is indicated by the purge of these scapegoats.
 
Compare Stalin’s Boasts With Those Purged!
All the Stalinist boasts of successes of agriculture, for example, are exposed as lies by the single fact that I.A. Benedictov, the Peoples’ Commissar of Agriculture, was one of those expelled from the Central Committee. Was that expulsion Benedictov’s reward for the bumper crop allegedly harvested in 1940?
I.A. Likhachov, another deposed member of the Central Committee, was the Peoples’ Commissar of Medium Machine Building. He was removed from the Commissariat last October, which testifies eloquently to the catastrophic conditions in this important branch of industry.
N.M. Antselovich, another expelled C.C. member, was at the same time removed from his post as Peoples’ Commissar of Timber Industry. He is Stalin’s scapegoat for “shortcomings” in this particular field.
E.A. Schadenko, who was “demoted” to the position of alternate, was Vice-Commissar of Defense. This speaks volumes about the collapse of the defense industry, which was militarized last December. If we refrain from listing the others it is only in order to avoid repetition.
The Daily Worker itself published the news that, in addition to the expulsions, seven Peoples’ Commissars were warned to “improve” the functioning of their Commissariats, namely:

The People’s Commissariat of Aircraft.
The People’s Commissariat of Munitions.
The People’s Commissariat of Electrical Industry.
The People’s Commissariat of Chemical Industry.
The People’s Commissariat of Marine Transport.
The People’s Commissariat of River Transport.
The People’s Commissariat of Fishing Industry.

To this list must be added the following partial table of those Commissariats which were purged last October and November, i.e., four months prior to the Conference:

The People’s Commissariat of Ferrous Metallurgy.
The People’s Commissariat of Non-Ferrous Metallurgy.
The People’s Commissariat of Coal.
The People’s Commissariat of Oil.
The People’s Commissariat of Light Industries.
The People’s Commissariat of Defense Industries.
The People’s Commissariat of Ship Building.
The People’s Commissariat of Transport.
The People’s Commissariat of Building Industry.
The People’s Commissariat of Communications.
The People’s Commissariat of State Planning.
The People’s Commissariat of Domestic Trade.
The People’s Commissariat of Foreign Trade.
The People’s Commissariat of Health.
The People’s Commissariat of Justice.
The People’s Commissariat of Cinema.
The People’s Commissariat of Art.

And so forth and so on.
 
Short Life for GPU and Army Heads
Many of these Commissariats were purged not once but several times in the period since the Finnish invasion.
For instance in June 1940 Stalin completely reorganized the Commissariat of War. Shaposhnikov the then Chief of the Red Army’s General Staff was replaced by one E.A. Meretskov. reportedly the hero of the break through the Mannerheim line. Meretskov was feted, decorated and raised to the rank of General. After a tenure of less than eight months, he was removed from office. On February 13, 1941, two days before the Conference convened, he was replaced by one G.K. Zhukov, who was hastily elevated at the Conference to the post of alternate on the Central Committee. Meretskov’s name wasn’t even mentioned during the proceedings!
Stalin apparently finds it most difficult to stabilize the GPU. This main pillar of his regime 1941, when one Merkulov was appointed in place of Beria, as Peoples’ Commissar of State Security, i.e., the GPU. Merkulov lasted less than a month, to be exact some 21 days, to be still more exact he was officially removed on February 22, 1941. His successor is as yet unknown.
 
A Crude Attempt to Cover Up the Debacle
Immediately after the adjournment of the Conference – at which the main reporter, Malenkov, refrained from summarizing, in emulation, no doubt, of Stalin himself who kept his mouth altogether shut – a plenary Session of the “reorganized” Central Committee was held. To cover up the bankruptcy involuntarily revealed at the five-day Conference, the plenum hastened to “project a 15 Year Plan.”
If the Third Five Year Plan has collapsed, then the thing to do is to cover up the debacle with a Fifteen Year Plan!
“Speaking of sensational news,” shrieked the Daily Worker, “word has just arrived that the Soviet Union is now embarking on a FIFTEEN YEAR PLAN. What capitalist statesman,” continued this brazen mouthpiece of Stalin, “can even look that far ahead – no less plan for it?” (February 23, emphasis in the original)
Hitler’s motto: The more monstrous the lie, the more readily will people believe it.
Here is the plan Stalin projects for the Soviet workers for the current year. “The 1941 plan.” declared Voznessensky, one of those who took the floor at the Conference, “provides for an increase in labor productivity by 12 per cent with the average wage increase per worker of 6.5 percent.” This means that for every “12 per cent” of his 1941 output, every worker receives not 12 per cent in terms of his 1940 wages but 5.5 percent less. In other words, still another wage cut for the Soviet workers! “This relation,” continued Voznessensky, “between the increase in labor productivity and the average wage is the source of the lowering cost of production.” (Daily Worker, February 23)
The parasites in the Kremlin know of no other way to lower the costs of production than to drive ever lower the living standards of the masses. On the other hand, the administrators, engineers, and foremen will receive special bonuses, rewards, etc., as an incentive to speed up the workers and child laborers.
 
The Masses Will Not Endure It
Stalin and his flunkeys welcome such a perspective – for 15 more years! – but they are obviously reckoning without the Soviet masses. Stalin’s bid for an additional decade and a half will meet the same fate at the hands of the Soviet workers as will Hitler’s plan to establish Fascist rule for one thousand years in Germany at the hands of the German workers.
As if to further underscore their contempt for the American workers, Browder-Minor and Co. editorially advertised Voznessensky’s report as a “Special Treat” for the readers of the Daily Worker. (Feb. 22)
Stalin undoubtedly has other “special treats” to dish up during the sessions of the Supreme Council of the USSR.
 




At the Eighteenth Party Conference, held in Moscow a few weeks, ago, the Communist Party of the Soviet Union was in effect divested of its former leading role in the life of the country.
Who attended this Conference? Who voted unanimously for Stalin’s latest “triumphs”?
Most of the delegates were very young. “More than 35 per cent of those present”, boasted Moscow, “are under 36 years of age, 42.8 per cent are under 40 and only 8 delegates are over 50.” (Daily Worker, February 21)
“Only 8 delegates are over 50!” Only 8 delegates out of 500 present at Stalin’s conference were actually old enough to have participated in any leading or secondary capacity in the October revolution, which occurred 24 years ago, in October 1917. Almost one-half of the delegates at the conference, or 47.8 per cent, were under sixteen in 1917. More than one third, or 35 per cent, were children under eleven in the year 1917 and therefore could have played no part whatever either in the October insurrection or in the period of the Civil War.
“Five per cent of all the delegates present joined the Communist Party prior to 1917 and 15 per cent joined prior to 1923.” (Daily Worker, February 21)
Only 15 per cent of the delegates joined the party prior to 1923! That is to say, 85 per cent – the overwhelming majority – became members only after the revolution, only after the Civil War, only after Lenin’s death. Such are Stalin’s own vital statistics relating to the Eighteenth Party Conference.
 
What These Figures Mean Is Clear
The terrible meaning of these statistics is clear enough: Of Lenin’s comrades-in-arms, not a single one has remained to figure even as a delegate. Stalin has completely destroyed the entire generation of revolutionists who together with Lenin built the Bolshevik party; who together with Lenin made the revolution. If only eight of the delegates were “over fifty,” it means that in addition to destroying the oldest generation of revolutionists, Stalin has also sent to their graves the next generation, that is, those who were old enough to have participated in the Civil War; those who helped raise Stalin to power after Lenin died; those, who carried on their shoulders the first and Second Five Year Plans. That is how Stalin has “stabilized” his regime.
More than one-third of the delegates at this Conference were appointed by 125 City Committees, 30 Party organizations in railways, and 27 party organizations in the ports, sea and river fleets. These 182 bodies, in their turn, represent but a small minority even of the top committees of the party. According to Stalin’s own report to the Eighteenth Party Congress, in March 1939, the system of leading party bodies embraces the following:



  30


Area Committees




104


Regional Committees




212


City Committees




336


City District Committees



Of these 682 top committees, then, only 182 were deemed sufficiently trustworthy to be, given “representation” at the Conference.
This means that Stalin cannot find voluntary support even among the generation of party functionaries who have no other traditions and who know of no other regime than that of Stalinism.
 
The Stalin School of “Statistics”
To cover up the bankruptcy of its regime in its own party, the Kremlin resorts to the same device with which it tries to cover up its economic bankruptcy, namely, inflated statistics. To believe Moscow, the Russian party is now growing at an unprecedented speed. To show figures of growth. party members and party candidates are now lumped together. “It is not without significance,” reads the latest dispatch from Moscow, “that the Party ... is on the way of doubling its membership: the 2,477,66 members and candidates which the party had two years ago has increased to 3,876,885. (Daily Worker, March 11)
Soviet Russia Today goes so far as to brazenly declare that the delegates at the Eighteenth Party Conference “represented 3,876,885 Party members.” (March 1941)
But what do these boasts of Stalin really prove? Stalin’s own figures show that since June 1940, that is, in the last eight months, he has purged not less than one-third of a million party members and candidates. Here is the proof:
According to an official statement, 605,627 members and 1,127,802 candidates, or a total 6f 1,733,429 new members and candidates were admitted into the Party from April 1, 1939, to June 1, 1940. (Pravda, July 29, 1940) But, as Stalin now reveals, on April 1, 1939, there were 2,477,666 members and candidates on the party rolls. Therefore in June 1940 the total party membership was 4,211,095 (2,477,666 plus 1,733,429). Yet in February 1941 there were only 3,876,885 members and candidates on the rolls. If we now subtract the number on the rolls in February 1941 (3,876,885) from the number on the rolls in June 1940 (4,211,095), we shall obtain the number admittedly purged in the last eight months, namely – 334,210. The real number of those purged is unquestionably far larger.
Stalin has been reducing the specific weight of the party by flooding its ranks. At the same time, this influx of raw elements is utilized to cover up the monstrous proportions of the latest blood-purge. Stalin’s bureaucratic apparatus of domination has crumbled beyond repair.
 




Stalin is resorting for a second time in fifteen years to the policy of inflation which look such a terrible toll among the Soviet masses during the First Five Year Plan.
Incontrovertible proof that Soviet currency is again being recklessly inflated is to be found in the budget adopted by the Supreme Council of the USSR.
Generally speaking, statistics are not very inspiring. Stalinist-falsified statistics are most wearisome of all. But the data relating to Stalin’s 1941 budget is of such great importance, and bears so directly on Soviet developments, that every thinking worker, every real defender of the Soviet Union, is duty bound to acquaint Himself with and to verify for himself the facts presented in this article. The 1941 budget originally called for a natural income of 216,000,000,000 rubles and a total outlay of 215,400,000,000 rubles. “The anticipated revenue.” explained Moscow, “will exceed expenditures by 788 million rubles.” (Daily Worker, February 26)
The national income for 1940 as “estimated” at 179 billion rubles. The 1941 budget, therefore, proposed to spend 36.4 billion rubles more than the income of the year before! Where would this from increased production? Not even Stalin’s boasters dared claim that production for 1941 would be the production of the previous year. Then the additional spending could come, logically, only from the hides of the Soviet workers and peasants.
But the budget finally adopted by the Supreme Council – one of Stalin’s aliases – surpasses even these staggering figures. The “estimate”, now officially fixed than 222,375,000,000 rubles, while the expenditures are fixed at 216,052,000,000 rubles. (New York Times, March 2) Thus without a word of explanation the expenditures were boosted by almost a million, while the revenues were made to exceed the expenditures – on paper – by more than six billion.
When the budget was first announced, the Daily Worker asked pertinently enough: “Where are the revenues of the state budget drawn from?” The answer reads:
“The bulk of the revenues is drawn from the Socialist industry.” (Daily Worker, February 27)
This answer is quite true in recent years have been actually based on two primary sources of revenue: turnover taxes aim profits from industry. These two sources did provide from 85 to 90 per cent of all revenue in recent years.
But these two sources cannot supply amounts even closely approximating the astronomic sums required by the 1941 budget. To prove this, we shall use only official Stalinist figures.
 
Printing-Press “Profits”
According to Voznessensky, Chairman of the Slate Planning Commission. Soviet industry showed last year a profit of less than 14 billion rubles. “In 1940,” he said, addressing the Eighteenth Party Conference, “the profits already amounted to nearly 14,000,000,000 rubles.” (Daily Worker, February 23)
The highest increase in profits envisaged by Moscow for 1941 was 40 per cent, which would make total 1941 profits of not more than 20 billion rubles.
But according to the budget Soviet industry must provide no less than 31 billion rubles in profits. “The profits tax,” lied Moscow, “will bring in 31,000,000,000 rubles. that is it will be 40 per cent more than last year.” (Daily Worker, February 27) The brazen fraud is self-evident. 31 billion is over the 1940 profit of 14 billion, and not 40 per cent as is falsely asserted.
The new figure for “profits” can be realized, therefore, in only one way. Stalin will have to print billions of paper rubles. There is no possible source for the billions which constitute the “extra” 85 per cent profit other than Moscow’s printing presses.
The second major source of which is essentially an indirect “In 1941,” asserts the Kremlin, to yield 124.5 billion rubles.” (Daily Worker, February 27) Yet, according to Voznessensky, who presented the official estimate of the State Planning Commission three days before, “turnover of state and comparative trade in 1941 ... will amount to nearly 197 billion rubles”. (Daily Worker, February 23) Taxes on this turnover, according to the figure given three days later, amount to more than 65 per cent of the total turnover for 1941.
Stalin is not a fool. But only fool could seriously expect to divert into the state treasury 124.5 billion out of a total trade turnover of 197 billion. Stalin has, in reality, a different plan: the printing presses will work overtime to produce paper rubles by means of which the needed sums can be extorted from the population.
The extent of the currency inflation to which Stalin is resorting can best be gauged by comparing the total income from these two primary sources with the entire budget. Even by Stalin’s figures, “profits” of 31 billion and “taxes” of 124.5 billion add up to only 155.5 billion rubles. But the budget calls for expenditures or 216.05 billion. This leaves the enormous sum of 60.45 billion still to he accounted for.
 
Where Will Stalin Find This Money
Could 60.45 billion conceivably be obtained through direct taxation? The standard of living of the masses would have to be very, very high indeed to make such a course feasible. The Kremlin, however, does not even pretend that this amount can be obtained through direct taxation.
Direct taxes – income tax paid by the workers and office employees, by collective farm household, by collective farmers, and by individual peasant households, and also the agricultural tax – never played a major role in state budgets; in all previous budgets direct taxes amounted to 7% of the total. Not that Stalin has neglected this means for further degrading the masses. far from it. By
taxing the wages of workers who make as little as 150 rubles a month, by levying an even stiffer tax on peasants earning as little as 100 rubles a month, and through all other channels of direct taxation, 9.7 billion rubles were squeezed out for the treasury In 1940. But that amounted to less than 6% of the total budget.
For 1941, direct taxes have been doubled, which means a new deduction from the pay envelopes. The Daily Worker was the only newspaper which did not carry the dispatches from Moscow reporting this increased taxation. The big metropolitan dailies reported the Stalinist-censored version which made the income tax apply only to peasants. The truth is that it also applies to the workers. The only ones exempt from direct taxes are the privileged bureaucrats, those who have been decorated, etc.
Yet the Kremlin is forced to admit that it will he able to squeeze out not more than 12.5 billion rubles from direct taxes. (Daily Worker, February 27)
There remains for Stalin the notorious method of state loans, subscription to which is in effect obligatory. The loans for 1941 have been fixed at an unprecedented figure of 13 billion rubles.
But, even so, direct taxes and forced loans will bring less than half of the 60.55 billion rubles still to be found for expenditures.
Again, the only possible way in which this shortage of scores of billions can be covered is – the printing press.
It is hardly necessary to explain what inflation means to the are already sky-high. The shortage of goods is already acute. Inflation, in the Soviet Union as in the capitalist, world, will mean still higher prices, even less goods. Mr. Walter Duranty, whose dispatches are invariably hailed by the Daily Worker, gives the lie direct to the brazen claims of Minor-Browder aud Co. that the Soviet masses are constantly receiving more and more consumers’ goods. “Mr. Voznessensky,” reports Duranty, “frankly admitted that the production of consumers’ goods must still take a secondary place.” (N.Y. Times, February 25)
Let every Communist Party member, who tries to solace himself with the illusion that Stalin is draining the masses for the sake of strengthening the Soviet Union, ask himself these questions:

Why does Stalin resort to deliberate inflation at the “threshold of communism”?
 
Why, if the masses love his regime, does he not openly call upon them to make voluntarily the sacrifices which he, instead, is deceitfully extorting from them through the inflationary process?
 
Why is the bureaucracy exempted from taxes and any all sacrifices? Isn’t it an established fact that planned economy is gravely disrupted if there is no stable currency?
 
Isn’t it a fact that any regime in history which has deliberately resorted to inflation has thereby demonstrated the desperate crisis of that regime?
 
How can such a regime really defend the Soviet Union?

 



What the Old Joint Committee Did
The Russian and British Trade Unions have agreed to form a joint committee to aid in the successful prosecution of the war against Hitler. This maneuver of the Kremlin recalls to mind Stalin’s previous venture with a similar body, the Anglo-Russian Committee which was formed in May 1925.
The purpose of the 1925 committee was declared to be to promote international trade union unity, to conduct a struggle against the march of reaction, and to prevent the outbreak of the second world war. The Stalinist bureaucracy hailed it as a bulwark in the defense of the USSR. In July 1926, Stalin declared:
“The task of this bloc (the Anglo-Russian Committee) consists in organizing a broad movement of the working class against new imperialist wars and generally against an intervention in our country especially on the part of the mightiest of the imperialist powers of Europe, on the part of England in particular.”
The Party Moscow District Committee boasted:
“The Anglo-Russian Committee can, must, and will undoubtedly play an enormous role in the struggle against all possible interventions directed against the USSR, It will become the organizing center of the international forces of the proletariat for the struggle against every attempt of the international bourgeoisie to provoke a new war.”
This committee achieved none of its purported aims. Instead, it dealt a terrible blow to the English labor movement and weakened the international position of the Soviet Union at the time. Far from serving in the interests of the USSR, it promoted only the interests of the British imperialists. The reactionary leaders of the General Council of the British Trade Unions were able to utilize their cordial relations with the Red Trade Unions and the Kremlin in order to smash the British General Strike of May 1926: The Committee continued to exist for a year after this treachery to the English labor movement, and was dissolved not on Stalin’s initiative but by the demonstrative withdrawal of the British labor leaders, after the committee had served all their purposes.
 
Treachery on a Grander Scale
The Anglo-Russian Committee was an important stage in the degeneration of the Stalinist bureaucracy. At that time, the bureaucrats undermined the defense of the USSR and betrayed the interests of the proletariat by conniving with and covering up the labor agents of British imperialism. The Kremlin now repeats its treachery on a grander scale in collaboration not only with the lackeys but the masters. The basic lessons of the debacle of the Anglo-Russian Committee retain their full force today. In 1925 the Stalinist bureaucracy revealed the same contempt and distrust of the masses that characterizes its present conduct. It seeks allies only among the tops – in the war cabinets of the “democratic” imperialists and in the ranks of the labor bureaucracy. During the existence of the Anglo-Russian Committee, Stalin shunted the Communist International aside in favor of his bloc with Purcell and Hicks, which he then palmed off as an “organizing center of the international forces of the proletariat.” Today the Communist International has been completely gagged. It has not issued even a formal statement in connection with the defense of the Soviet Union. In the period of the first Anglo-Russian Committee, Stalin at least pretended that the bloc with the reactionary trade union leaders was directed “against the counter-revolutionary imperialists of their own country,” i.e., against Churchill and Co. The reconstituted bloc is based on the open support of this same Churchill.
Bevin-Morrisson and Co. are as faithful servants of the ruling class as were Purcell and Hicks. If the latter were able to cover themselves with the prestige of the Soviet Union in breaking the 1926 General Strike, then Bevin and Morrisson are now supplied by Stalin with the same cover in their support of the imperialist war and the imperialist aims of their masters.
We have no objection to the Soviet Government asking and seeking to obtain material aid from either Roosevelt or Churchill. But Stalin is making the Soviet Union pay a political price for this aid which far outweighs any immediate advantages.
Let us grant for a moment that this trade union bloc will serve in the next period to increase the flow of material aid to the Red Army. What weight has this temporary advantage as against the terrible weapons Stalin’s policy leaves in Hitler’s hands? The chief hold of the Nazis upon the people of Germany consists in the latter’s dread of a new Versailles for a defeated Germany. Stalin by his policies links the defense of the USSR with the program of a worse edition of Versailles for Germany. Stalin’s bloc with Bevin commits both the Red Trade Union and English organized labor to this same program.
Such a policy can never disintegrate the morale of the German army, or shake Hitler’s regime. On the contrary, it supplies Hitler with advantages that no superiority of tanks, planes and other armament could avail him.
Churchill and Co. will send only the amount of material aid that serves their purposes. They and they alone will determine the quantity of tanks; planes, etc., that will be shipped. Today, as yesterday, far from promoting the interests of the Soviet Union, the trade union bloc, the revival of the Anglo-Russian Committee under wartime conditions, can promote only the interests of British imperialism. Stalin is once again bartering the political interests of the Soviet Union and of the world working class in return for immediate and picayune advantages. To give effective aid to the heroic workers and soldiers of the USSR, the English workers must break with their reactionary labor leaders. They must oppose the imperialist war and its program of a new Versailles, and must raise high the banner of international solidarity. The German- masses will join them in the fight for the Socialist U.S. of Europe. This program, and this program alone will overthrow Hitler, destroy fascism and preserve the Soviet Union.
 



On September 8, the Kremlin finally made public the text of the ukase which exiles Soviet citizens en masse to Siberia because of their racial origin! This monstrous ukase reads:
“THE PRAESIDIUM OF THE SUPREME COUNCIL OF THE USSR HAS FOUND IT NECESSARY TO RESETTLE THE ENTIRE GERMAN POPULATION OF THE VOLGA REGIONS TO OTHER DISTRICTS.” (N.Y. Times, September 8)
During the first world war, bloody Czar Nicholas resorted to repressive measures against his subjects of German birth. Toward the end of 1916, the Czarist regime, fanning racial hatreds, began preparations to exile all Volga Germans to Siberia. The date set for this mass expulsion was April 1917. Here is how Stalin’s official Soviet Encyclopedia, summed up the fate of the Czarist ukase:
“The overthrow of the autocracy prevented the execution of this barbaric measure. When the colonists appealed to the Provisional Government to repeal this law, Kerensky agreed only to ‘suspend the execution of this ukase.’ This ukase was repealed only by the Great October Socialist Revolution which put an end to national oppression and which opened up the broad highway for the development of national culture, socialist in content and national in form” (Bolshaya Sovetskaya Entsiklopedia, vol. 41, p. 595, Moscow 1939).
These lines were printed two years ago in 1939 – the year of the Stalin-Hitler pact. Now Stalin reminds the Volga Germans that the Czar has found an emulator.
 
Background of the Volga Germans
The German settlements on the Volga date back to the middle of the Eighteenth Century when Catherine the Great invited foreigners to settle there. Deep in the interior of the country, this territory of 28,000 square kilometers, now bordered by Saratov and Stalingrad oblasts (areas), is even further removed today from the arena of military operations than it was in the days of Czar Nicholas. The original settlers predominantly came – between 1764 and 1864 – from Westphalia, Bavaria, Saxony, Swabia, Alsace-Lorraine and Switzerland. The privileges originally granted them were gradually pared away. At the outbreak of the first imperialist slaughter their status was that of another oppressed nationality in what Lenin called “the Czarist prison of nations.” The October revolution emancipated them.
The Volga Germans were among the first to be granted autonomy in the federation of the Soviet republics. On October 19, 1918, Lenin signed a decree establishing the autonomous oblast (area) of the Volga Germans. Stalin was then the Commissar for Nationalities. The above-quoted article in the Soviet Encyclopedia does not fail to underscore that:
“Comrade Stalin paid from the very beginning great attention to the question of self-determination of the Volga Germans.”
These descendants of the original colonists fought staunchly against the White Guards. The extent of their participation in the Civil War may be gauged by the fact that in the last year of the Civil War, the population of this area dropped from 453,000 in 1920 to less than 350,000 in 1921, i.e., a loss of more than 20 per cent. In 1926 the Autonomous Volga German Socialist Republic was formally established.
According to official 1936 figures, the population of this territory numbered about 500,000 of whom a little less than two-thirds (66.4 per cent) were of German origin; 20.4 per cent, Russians and 12 per cent Ukrainians. Today, there are not more than 300,000 German-born inhabitants in this region whose advancement constituted one of the boasts of Stalin’s regime.
 
What the Stalinists Said Yesterday
The German-born Volga peasants were only yesterday hailed as models of collective farming. The Stalinist tales of successes of mechanized agriculture in this area would fill a whole library. Suffice it to quote the stereotyped panegyrics with which the article in the Soviet Encyclopedia concludes:
“The further development of the national economy and culture of Volga German Autonomous Socialist Republic and her rapid progress to a better and a still happier life are guaranteed by the Stalinist Constitution, by the firm Stalinist leadership of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union and by the boundless devotion of the toilers of the Autonomous Volga German Socialist Republic to the cause of communism.”
In 1941, this Autonomous Republic is abolished as a danger to the state. What an admission of bankruptcy!
Today Stalin violates Article 13 of his own “Constitution” which “guarantees” the rights of national minorities. Why? The official explanation reads:
“According to reliable information received by the military authorities, thousands and tens of thousands of diversionists and spies among the German population of the Volga are prepared to cause explosions in these regions at a signal from Germany.” (N.Y. Times, September 8)
Let us grant for the moment that the Kremlin, contrary to its custom, is this time telling the truth. Could there be a greater condemnation of Stalin’s regime than this admission that after all the “successes” there remain thousands, nay, tens of thousands who await only a signal from the Nazis to rise against the Soviet power? Why should the loyalty of these thousands be swayed so easily? What better material for propaganda could Hitler expect than that now supplied him by the Kremlin?
And this ukase comes on the heels of assurances on the part of all of Stalin’s pen prostitutes that his blood purges and his frameups have “rooted out the enemies of the people.”
 
A GPU Confession
The Times dispatch relating to the ukase against the Volga Germans contains the following comment, passed by the Kremlin censors:
“No Germans from the Volga have reported the existence of purportedly large numbers of dissidents who have been uncovered.”
This terse statement is as revealing as the tell-tale formulas of the Kremlin concerning “diversionists” and “spies.”
Here we have an official admission that the G.P.U. is uncovering “dissidents” in large numbers. In the language of the Kremlin every dissident, everyone critical of Stalin is a “diversionist and a spy.” Today they are being discovered in the Volga region. And tomorrow?
The ukase of August 28 constitutes a “warning” to all dissidents that they will suffer the fate of the Volga Germans. Henceforth, every dissident wherever “discovered” will be officially linked with “diversionists and spies.” By the mass expulsion to Siberia of these German-born Volga scape-goats, Stalin seeks to stir up racial hatred and with this as a cover to prepare the ground for similar mass purges in other areas.
But at the same time, the latest ukase of the Kremlin reveals that the opposition to the bureaucratic regime is growing among the population. The Soviet masses areheroically defending the Soviet Union. They are not fighting for the perpetuation of the bureaucrats.
 



On August 20, the Reich, the official organ of the German imperialists, announced to the world that the Soviet collective farms – the kolkhozi – Would be retained in the areas of the Soviet Union occupied by the German troops. There has been no comment from the Kremlin. Nor, has the Daily Worker seen fit to point out that so far as official Nazi propaganda is concerned this move represents a complete about-face.
The Nazis had boasted hitherto that they would abolish the collectives in favor of “freedom of the soil and individual property for the Russian peasant.” Hitler had undoubtedly hoped to rally Russian peasants to his side by means of the self-same demagogic promise with which he had duped the German peasants to whom he had also originally promised land. Since June 22, when the Nazi assault was launched, the German press has waged a campaign attacking Soviet economy, and especially singling out the collectives as one “of the worst forms of ‘economic slavery’ and as one of the extreme cases of Soviet inefficiency and mismanagement” (N.Y. Times, July 12).
A censored dispatch from Berlin explains the about-face as follows:
“It is realized that the maintenance of agricultural production at anything like its level in the Soviet days could be safeguarded in the German interests only if, for the time being, the jxisting organization of agriculture were preserved in its main outlines.” (N.Y. Times, August 21)
In other words, this move, on Hitler’s part, represents a repeat in the face of insurmountable difficulties confronting the German imperialists in their attempt to exploit the, economic resources of the occupied territories. At the very outset the imperialist conqueror is compelled to surrender the chief political weapon by means of which a section of the local peasantry could conceivably be rallied to the Nazi camp.
At the same time, Hitler runs the risk of placing a further strain on German industry; that would be involved in any attempt by Hitler to retain the collectives. For it is impossible to operate the latter without machines, tractors, oil, etc., so urgently needed by the war machine. Thus far from facilitating the tasks of occupation and economic exploitation, this latest plan of the German imperialists can in the long run only seriously aggravate them. Obviously, Hitler has no other alternative.
But how is it possible for the Nazis to try this “experiment” with the collectives in the territory they occupy? Isn’t this tantamount to the adoption even if temporarily – by the fascists of “socialist forms of economy”? Not at all.
Nothing could be further from the truth than the conception that in retaining the collectives. Hitler is gambling with socialism against his will. Historical events are once again exploding another monstrous lie of Stalin’s.
It was Stalin and the Stalinists who claimed that the collectives are a genuine socialist type of enterprise. It was the Kremlin that boasted that the institution of the collectives destroyed the capitalist elements in agriculture; abolished for all time the contradiction, between city and country; assured the irrevocable triumph of socialism in one country, and so forth and so on. As a matter of ‘fact, the collectives, in and by themselves, are far removed from socialism and are incapable of achieving the goal claimed for them by Stalin.
Collectives merely represent a form of large scale farming. They are no more incompatible with the capitalist mode of production than are, for instance, various types of cooperatives. Under Stalin’s regime, the kolkhozi have re mained far closer in type to petty bourgeois cooperatives than to the communal agricultural enterprises which are possible only under socialism. It is just for this reason, and this reason alone, that the Nazis can now even speculate on the possibility of utilizing the collectives to serve their purposes
Within the kolkhozi as they are now constituted, their exists a profound class differentiation, which has been fostered by Stalin’s policies. Within the Soviet collectives there are embryo rural bourgeois – “millionaire kolkhozniks”, and typical kulak elements. It is on these elements that the Nazis are banking for support.
A Berlin dispatch for August 31 leaves no doubt on this score:
“The collective farms ... are to continue operation,” states Berlin, “under managers who will be selected from the ‘more expert and diligent peasants’, according to the provisional orders cited.” (N.Y. Times, September 1)
This fancy formula of “more expert and diligent peasants” is merely Hitler’s way of designating the kulaks for whom the collectives have long provided a cover. Hitler’s “provisional orders” reveal the class composition of the collectives for all those who have eyes to see. Only the blind can fail to understand that if the collectives really represented what the Stalinists have always claimed, then Hitler and the German imperialists could have never resorted to them as a possible solution. Small wonder that the Daily Worker prefers to keep silent on this topic!
 



In recent weeks the Kremlin has concluded a number of agreements with the camp of the “democratic” imperialists; one with Churchill; another with the “Czechoslovak Government in Exile”; and, on July 30, with the “Polish Government in Exile.” And now a Three Power Pact, that is, an alliance with Roosevelt and Churchill against Germany and Japan, is in the making.
Trotskyist views are gaining such sympathy among American workers that the local Stalinists in addition to slandering us are compelled once more to lie about our position in order to “refute” it. To believe the Daily Worker, what the Trotskyists oppose are the practical aspects or Stalin’s foreign policy, i.e., the fact that the Kremlin arrives at agreements with this or that camp of the contending imperialist bandits.
No, we did not oppose this in the past; we do not oppose it now. We are in favor of the Soviet government grabbing with both hands the greatest amount of material aid from its imperialist allies. Nor do we hold that practical concessions made to London or Washington constitute in and of themselves an indictment of the Kremlin.
We would not for a moment deny to the Soviet government, although headed by Stalin, the right to utilize every rift among the imperialists. Lenin taught us that the proletariat must know how to analyze and utilize every contradiction in the camp of its enemies. The proletariat in power must do so in relation to its external enemies; the workers who are trying to rid themselves of the exploiters must proceed similarly in relation to their internal enemies.
 
Lenin And Trotsky – Revolutionary Realists
In the Infantile Disease of Leftism Lenin explained:
“... To refuse beforehand to tack and veer in one’s course and to make good use of antagonisms (no matter how temporary) between the interests of one’s enemies; to reject agreements and compromises with possible allies (no matter how temporary, vacillating and adventitious) – isn’t that too ridiculous for words?”
The position which Lenin characterized as ridiculous is the position which the Daily Worker tries to ascribe to us, whereas, in point of fact, we reject it as false, and as having nothing in common with Marxism.
The question of relations between the Soviet state and its imperialist environment is, in essence, – as Trotsky pointed out time and again – a question of the relation of forces. The weaker is the position of the USSR, all the more necessary are alliances.
Nothing is altered fundamentally by the fact that Stalin’s ruinous policies have led to the weakening of the international position of the Soviet Union to the advantage of imperialism. That is true. But the consequences, of these Stalinist, policies are independent of Moscow’s will and cannot be dismissed arbitrarily. There is no withdrawing from an unfavorable situation merely by ignoring it or wishing it away. One must always take the existing relation of forces as the starting point.
Lenin and Trotsky never hesitated to undertake measures dictated by necessity. Thus, because of extremely unfavorable circumstances, they agreed to make onerous concessions to German imperialism at .Brest-Litovsk in 1918. In the early days of the Civil War, the Bolsheviks were prepared to make equally onerous concessions to Wilson, Lloyd George and Clemenceau.
Far from denying the Soviet Government the right to make alliances with imperialists, our movement has from the beginning pointed out that Stalin’s policies – above all, the theory and practice of “Socialism in one country” – drove the USSR into a position which made such alliances unavoidable. In 1934 Trotsky wrote:
“In the existing situation an alliance of the USSR with an imperialist state or with one imperialist combination against another, in case of war, cannot at all be considered as excluded. Under the pressure of circumstances, a temporary alliance of this kind may become an iron necessity ...” (War and the Fourth International)
Marxism never departs from the ground of revolutionary realism. In the past we broke unhesitatingly with all those who associated themselves with ridiculous and contrary views.
 
Stalin Repeats the Treachery of the Second International
Today as yesterday, what we oppose in Stalin’s foreign policy is this, that in utilizing the contradictions between imperialist governments, he goes beyond practical concessions and makes political concessions, or, more correctly, capitulates completely to his current imperialist ally. In return for practical concessions, Stalin barters the political interests of the USSR and of the world labor movement. Such was the case in the period of the Stalin-Laval pact and of People’s Fronts, it was the same with the Stalin-Hitler pact; it is the same today with regard to agreements with Roosevelt and Churchill.
The contradictions between rival imperialists must be utilized in no other way than from the viewpoint of the fundamental interests of the Soviet Union and of the world working class. It is impermissible to sacrifice these interests for the sake of practical agreements and temporary benefits. Yet this has been Stalin’s policy. In return for material aid, the Kremlin now supports the program of Roosevelt and Churchill, and calls upon the American and English workers to follow suit. This is treachery. To be an unconscious dupe in this treachery is the greatest ignominy.
Lenin and Trotsky never sacrificed – as do Stalin and all his lackeys – the program of Bolshevism , for the sake of partial and temporary, advantages. Soviet diplomacy, under Lenin and Trotsky always, took into account the public opinion of the world proletariat. The Kremlin never does. The Bolsheviks always explained not only the meaning and expediency of alliances with imperialists but also the dangers. They called things by their right names. When the perfidious German Socialists voted for the Brest-Litovsk Treaty, under the pretext that, after all, the Soviet government had “wanted it,” had “agreed to it,” “needed it,” etc:, Lenin branded them for what they were – traitors to the working class. The Soviet government, he pointed out, had no choice, but to accept, as a practical measure, the terms of the Kaiser’s High Command, whose military boot was on the, neck of the young Soviet republic.
The German Socialists, on the other hand, were free, as spokesmen for the German workers, to expose the program of German imperialism and to wage an irreconcilable struggle against it. Instead, these scoundrels gave political support to the class enemy. They voted for the Brest-Litovsk Treaty in the Reichstag, with “reservations.” It is not hard to guess how Lenin and Trotsky would have characterized the conduct of “communist” parties who cite material aid as justification for their support – without reservation – of every one of the Kremlin’s political capitulations to “democratic” imperialists.
The latest diplomatic moves, in which the imperialists use the USSR as a cover, are a preparation for a new Versailles, not only for Europe but for Asia. Roosevelt and Churchill present their demands. Stalin accepts them, acclaims them and lies about them. The Kremlin and all its foreign agencies cannot tell the truth for in that case it would be impossible to curry favor with the “democratic” allies by supporting their imperialist war.
 
How the Stalinists Help the Imperialists
The Daily Worker, on Moscow’s orders, hails even a Sikorsky, this anti-Semitic, fascist-minded representative of the blood-stained Polish gentry, as a reliable defender of the Soviet Union, a champion in the struggle for democracy and against fascism, and so forth and so on. Ten years ago, in 1931, Stalin could find no slander more vicious to fling at Trotsky than the charge that he, Trotsky, was an ally of Poland, and Pilsudsky.
Today, when Stalin is allied with Sikorky’s “Poland,” the Soviet people and the American workers are not even reminded that another Sikorsky was Pilsudsky’s Minister of War, when the latter in an alliance with Anglo-French imperialism, and with Churchill’s blessings, struck at the Soviet Union, after all other attempts of the counter-revolution had been beaten back by the Red Army, under Trotsky.
The Churchills and the Sikorskys have not changed their nature. Gven a favorable opportunity, they would like nothing better than to pit another Polish army against the Red Army. For all of Stalin’s “favors,” Churchill, Roosevelt and Co. remain as hostile to the USSR as they always were.
Meanwhile the masses are lulled with illusions. Each time they are caught unawares. The enemy is free to choose his own time and place for striking. The blows which this or that camp of the imperialists is thus able to deal the USSR, are redoubled in force.
Yesterday’s “reliable” ally becomes the “treacherous” enemy of today. Not because events have suddenly introduced unexpected and extraordinary changes into the situation, but because. Stalin always capitulates politically to temporary, unreliable, and treacherous allies whom the Kremlin itself camouflages and glorifies. The end result is always the same – another blow, another defeat, another catastrophe for the world working class.
It is against these Stalinist lies, this Stalinist treachery – concentrated in its foreign policy – and against the terrible dangers which they conceal that we conduct our fight. We raise our voices in warning: The first prerequisite for the successful defense of the USSR is a complete break with Stalinism.
 



The name of Leon Trotsky is inseparably bound up with the formation, life and victories of the Red Army. In addition to all his other gifts and achievements, Leon Trotsky established himself as one of the outstanding military leaders and strategists in history. No one will succeed in obscuring the connection between his role in organizing and building the Red Army and its successes, including the present heroic resistance of the Red soldiers against the Nazi onslaught.
No army was ever organized under such obstacles as confronted Lenin, Trotsky and the Bolsheviks in the organization of the first victorious army of the proletarian revolution.
When the workers seized power in Russia, in October 1917, the country’s economy verged on complete chaos as a result of the three years of imperialist world slaughter. Industry and trade were disrupted. The transportation system had collapsed; the system of communications existed in name only. There were no supplies for troops. The deposed landlords and capitalists did everything in their power to sabotage and undermine all constructive work. At the same time, the forces of the counter-revolution, supported by the imperialist world, threw army after army against the encircled revolution.
 
The Difficulties of Creating the Red Army
But even this did not exhaust the difficulties. In his report on the First Anniversary of the foundation of the Red Army, in February 1919, Trotsky analyzed the conditions at the time as follows:
“Disintegration of industry is of course an unfavorable condition for the creation of an army. But this was not all. The collapse of the old army left in its wake a bitter hatred of everything connected with militarism. The old army had exacted unbelievably heavy sacrifices; it had known only defeats, degradations, retreats, millions of corpses, millions of cripples, and billions in expenditures. It is hardly surprising that this war left in the minds of the popular masses a terrible revulsion to military life and everything connected with the old military clique. And it was under such conditions, Comrades, that we began building the army. Had we been compelled to begin on virgin soil, then we would have had from the outset, greater hopes and greater prospects. But no, the army had to be built on a soil of impoverishment and exhaustion, under circumstances when hatred of war and things military seized millions upon millions of workers and peasants. That is why a great many people, not only our enemies but also our friends, stated at the time that in the next few years nothing would come of our attempts to build an army in Russia.”
Still more: every other new regime in history immediately drew upon the old army organization for its own military work, For example, the armies of the Great French Revolution came into being as a result of the fusion of feudal regiments with the newly-formed national militia. No similar fusion was possible in the case of the Red Army: The corroded Czarist army not only fell apart but remained a source of infection and demoralization. This terrible obstacle had to be destroyed root and branch. The army of the revolution had to be built up brick by brick. Everything – discipline, fighting tradition, military authority, centralized organization, unified command, and so on – had to be built on new foundations, under fire, and against insuperable odds.
 
How the Army Was Built
An attempt was first made to form a volunteer army. The decree issued on February 23, 1918, supplied a few volunteer regiments of irregulars. On May 28, 1918, conscription was instituted. But no real army was in the field when Trotsky was placed in charge. There was only its human raw material comprising of: 1) bands of irregulars; 2) refugees escaping from the White Guards; 3) peasants mobilized on the neighboring districts; 4) detachments of workers sent by industrial centers; 5) groups of trade unionists and communists. These had to be forged into a new army, with a correct military organization, on the basis of new ideas, new discipline and new methods, under the direction of qualified commanders. Under whose leadership was this accomplished? Here is how Lenin depicted the situation in relation to the Red Army on March 15, 1920:
“After all, what did we begin with? Before Trotsky we had Krylenko, Dybenko, Podvoisky and we were left with this collegium, Kolchak and Denikin pasted the daylights out of us. Why? Because there were seven of us sitting together, and we had first to learn things for a space of two years and only then did we accept (the principle of) unified authority.” (Lenin’s Collected Works, Third Russian Edition, vol. XXV, pp. 84–85)
In Lenin’s opinion, before Trotsky took charge of the Red Army, there was no leadership, only “a collegium.” But Lenin affirmed a great deal more. In 1920, i.e., the critical year of the Civil War, he recognized that Trotsky had had to fight for two years for his basic political-strategical ideas in building the Red Army. This struggle had to be conducted not only against rank-and-file party opposition, but also against opponents in the Central Committee, and the Politbureau, who on several important occasions obtained a majority. This struggle, sometimes extremely sharp and bitter, concluded with the rout of the opposition and with the unreserved acceptance of those ideas, methods and principles which were first elaborated and applied by the Chairman of the Revolutionary Military Council, and which were later adhered to by the Soviet General Staff.
Of the five major political-strategical conflicts which arose in connection with the creation of the Red Army, we shall deal briefly only with the crucial struggle against the so-called “Military Opposition.”
In essence this was a struggle against alien class tendencies which manifested themselves in the military sphere by the advocacy of the ideas and methods of guerrilla warfare. Had the champions of guerrillaism prevailed, the doom of the first workers’ state would have been sealed on the battlefields of the Civil War.
 
The Basis of the “Military Opposition”
The chaos of guerrilla warfare, as Trotsky pointed out, expressed the peasant element that lay beneath the revolution, whereas the struggle against it was likewise a struggle in favor of the proletarian state organization as opposed to the elemental, petty bourgeois anarchy that was undermining it.
The majority of the army recruits were peasants. The country itself was a sea of insurgent peasantry to whom this type of warfare is not only traditional but instinctive. The Bolsheviks were likened by Lenin to a drop in these vast waters.
Against this background the methods and ways of guerrilla (or “irregular”) fighting found a response in the ranks of the party, a response reflecting the pressure – intensified by the crisis – of the peasantry. This tendency was so strong as to exert a temporary influence upon Lenin. Zinoviev, who together with Kamenev was the least military-minded of the Bolsheviks, flirted for a time with the “Military Opposition.” But its real inspirer and behind-the-scenes organizer was none other than Stalin.
Political struggles over new ideas and new problems almost invariably assume at the beginning the form of a struggle around organizational issues. This was the case with the struggle for the correct political-strategical foundations for the Red Army. The Stalin-led “Military Opposition” stood for ideas which made impossible a correct military organization. Their ideas were in reality the ideas of vulgar petty bourgeois “democrats” translated into military terms. They favored the electoral method of choosing commanders; they opposed the enlistment of military experts, the introduction of military discipline on a proletarian basis; the centralisation of the army; unified command, and so on. The dispute centered round the utilization of former Czarist officers. The champions of guerrillaism seized on it because it provided them with the best cover for their false line ...
Polemicising against Stalin-Voroshilov and Co., at the time, Trotsky wrote:
“We should indeed have a low opinion of ourselves and our party, of the moral force of our idea, of the attractive power of our revolutionary morale, if we thought ourselves incapable of winning over thousands upon thousands of ‘specialists’ including military ones.”
The opposition to military specialists in reality reflected an. exaggerated estimate of the powers the bourgeoisie and a contempt for the power of the masses which is so typical of petty-bourgeois outlook; Stalin-Voroshilov and Co. feared the “specialists” because they themselves lacked the necessary knowledge, ability and confidence.
In 1920, Lenin summed up the experience as follows:
“Thousands of former officers, generals and colonels of the Czarist army betrayed us ... you know this, but tens of thousands continue to serve us, while still remaining partisans of the bourgeoisie, and WITHOUT THEM WE WOULD NOT HAVE HAD A RED ARMY. And all of you know that when we tried to create a Red Army without them two years ago, what we got was GUERRILLAISM, CONFUSION. This is what we got: we had 10 to 12 million bayonets, but not a single division; we did not have a single division good enough for the front, and we were unable to fight with millions of bayonets against the insignificant regular army of the White Guards.”
 
Trotsky’s Achievements Remained After Him
Out of this “guerrillaism” and “confusion” a mighty army was forged which proved victorious on 22 fronts. Were such an army organized in Russia in the space of less than three years in peace-time and under normal conditions it would have constituted an extraordinary military achievement. When and where and by whom was another army built under such adverse conditions The revolution was saved because Trotsky’s line on the military arena carried with Lenin’s aid against Stalin and all his Voroshilovs. Trotsky’s success also secured the subsequent development of the Red Army. At the end of the Civil War, the Red Army numbered five million men, most of whom are still alive and many of whom are now fighting on the old battlefields of 1918–1921.
But Trotsky’s work in the army did not stop with the termination of the civil war. It was continued for five more years. History knows of many military leaders who succeeded in creating extraordinary commanding staffs; but few of them created staffs that did not fall apart after their departure. The commanding staff of the Red Army – likewise forged on the anvil of the revolution – was one of the great conquests of the October revolution. The Red Army as it exists today is primarily the handiwork of Trotsky and his General Staff. These men, the legendary heroes of the Civil War, advanced to leading positions under Trotsky and met with unbridled opposition at the bands of the “Military Opposition” above all, Stalin.
We cite only the case of Tukhachevsky, universally recognized as one of the ablest Soviet military leaders and strategists. Toward the end of 1919, Tukhachevsky found himself unceremoniously shoved aside. He appealed to Trotsky, whom he telegraphed from Kursk on January 19, 1920, as follows:
“I turn to you with an urgent request to free me from unemployment. I have been aimlessly sitting on the Staff of the South-West Front for almost three weeks, and have been completely without work for about three months. I have been unable to obtain any explanations either for the delay or for failure to get another assignment. If I have rendered any service after almost two years of command of various armies, then I ask to be given the opportunity to use my abilities in some active work ...”
Tukhachevsky’s term of “unemployment” coincided with Stalin’s brief sojourn during that period at the Southern front. Stalin utilized this occasion to deal an underhand blow to the Red Army command. If Stalin had the final say, Tukhachevsky – whom he dubbed Marshal in 1935 and murdered in 1937 – would have languished in oblivion and inactivity. But Stalin had very little to say or to do with the constructive work of the Red Army in 1918–1921. Most of that period he spent in civilian pursuits. The few months he did pass at the front were devoted more to political intrigue in favor of the “Military Opposition” than to the military struggle. Suffice it to point out that although formally a member of the Revolutionary Military Council, he never took part in any of its sessions. That is one of the reasons why the minutes of this body remain unpublished to this day.
 
Stalin’s Crimes Against the Red Army
Stalin’s direct intervention in military affairs from 1921 to the end of 1937 comes down to the following three political maneuvers: 1) the removal of Trotsky in 1925 from the post of Commissar of War (achieved by Stalin with the aid of Zinoviev and Kamenev); 2) the appointment of Frunze to this post, and Frunze’s mysterious death in November 1925; 3) the appointment of Voroshilov – then a follower of Bukharin-Rykov – in Frunze’s place.
Long after Stalin concentrated political power in his own hands, he had to leave the command of the Army in the hands of those who commanded it under Trotsky.
Throughout his term as Commissar of War, Voroshilov remained a mere figurehead. The work of the Red Army in all its fields was from 1925 to 1937 under the direction of the eight generals and other members of Trotsky’s General Staff, whom Stalin murdered in 1937–1938 as “enemies of the people.” It was they who continued to build the Red Army on the foundations laid down by Trotsky. They modernized and mechanized it. They planned and constructed the fortifications in the West (the so-called Stalin line) as well as in Siberia. They drafted the mobilization plans. They prepared the strategic plans for meeting future attacks.
The internal logic of Stalin’s Moscow frameups drove him in 1937–1938 to extend his purge to the Red Army. The Red Generals, who had submitted to Stalin politically, resisted the weakening of the armed forces. They paid with their lives. To extend his personal sway to the armed forces, Stalin had first to destroy the flower of the command of the Red Army, Navy and Airforce.
The heroic resistance of the Red Army to the Nazi onslaught now presents the whole world with additional factual evidence of Stalin’s infamous frame-ups of Tukhachevsky, Yakir, Uborevich, Alksnis and others. If, as the Stalinists lie, they were Hitler’s agents, the German High Command would have been adequately informed concerning the defenses of the USSR, its fortifications, mobilization plans, and other military secrets. Why then have the Nazi armies been caught by surprise?
The quality of the Red Army’s resistance is proof of how ably and loyally these men had fulfilled their tasks prior to Stalin’s savage blows to the fighting power of the Soviet army. All of Stalin’s crimes against the Red Army since 1937–1938 have not been able to undo the work initiated by Trotsky in August 1918, and carried on for the next 20 years by the men who served under him. It is the Army of the October Revolution and the Civil War – Trotsky’s Red Army – that is now fighting so heroically.
 



As these lines are being written, the German imperialist attack upon the Soviet Union enters upon its eighth week. Seven weeks of Blitzkrieg have failed to bring the Nazi strategists those decisive military results which they had so confidently expected and claimed in advance. The “time-table” of the German High Command has been very seriously disrupted. They cannot now attain their most immediate objectives: seizure of raw materials, stocks of oil, etc. and above all, the crops of the Ukraine.
The armies of German imperialism still retain the offensive. The territories of the USSR have been deeply penetrated. Strategic centers, the industrial heart of the country, including Moscow itself, are under direct threat, and so is the whole of the Ukraine. But the Red Army has already accomplished what no other, including the vaunted army of French imperialism, once hailed as “best in the world,” was thus far able to do: the Red soldiers have withstood two furious offensives, and have twice checked the full force of the greatest military machine ever constructed in history.
Had such achievements, or even far lesser ones been recorded by any army in the “democratic” imperialist camp, the capitalist press would be shrieking at the top of its voice in frenzied and ecstatic acclaim. The grudging recognition accorded the heroic struggle of the Red Army constitutes an admission by the bourgeoisie that the October revolution is now being justified on the military arena as it justified itself in the economic field by the successes of industrialization.
The October revolution is demonstrating once again to the world the unprecedented power and resources lodged in it. Seven weeks of the Soviet-Nazi war bring still another overwhelming proof of how correct Lenin, Trotsky and the Bolsheviks were in leading the Russian masses in 1917 to the conquest of power and the building of the first workers’ state in history.
The present war is the second struggle of the Soviet Union against imperialist attack and internal counter-revolution. In the infancy of the Soviet regime, when its material resources were infinitely weaker, with the Russian masses exhausted by three years of imperialist slaughter, the national economy ravaged seemingly beyond repair and the relationship of forces such as to make all resistance appear futile, the Bolshevik methods of political and military struggle united the living forces among the Russian people, created a new army and disintegrated and disheartened its most powerful opponents in the imperialist camp. Under Lenin and Trotsky’s leadership, under the banner and program of socialism, the Soviet Union beat back the interventionist attacks and saved the Soviet Union in a civil war of three years’ duration. The world was thus presented with the first irrefutable proof of the historical justification and necessity of the proletarian revolution.
This revolution was guided so consistently and firmly, erected on such solid foundations, tapped such vast reservoirs of power, that it was enabled not only to withstand the ravages of six years of imperialist warfare and civil war, but also to lift the country from the depths of the post-war crisis despite military and economic blockade by the capitalist world. No other rising regime in history ever faced such obstacles, such difficulties, such adverse conditions. After Lenin’s death, the October revolution was profoundly weakened by the rise and ascendancy of a privileged, ruthless and malignant bureaucracy. The revolution lived on.
But it began to degenerate. Beneath all contempt are those renegade communists who refused to recognize the first stages of this degeneration, and who then seized upon its later stages as a pretext to desert the revolution. The surprising thing is not that the revolution degenerated but that it survived at all.
The Left Opposition, led by Leon Trotsky, carried on a struggle whose vital influence on the fate of the Soviet Union is now being completely revealed. When the Soviet Union hovered on the verge of internal collapse and counter-revolution as a result of the ruinous economic and international policies of the Stalin-Bukharin bloc (1925–1929), it was the program of the Left Opposition which saved the young workers’ state. Stalin and the bureaucracy were compelled to adopt, even if in a terribly distorted form, Trotsky’s program of industrialization and planned economy. The successes of that program – just as the military achievements of today – surprised not only the imperialist world but the Stalinist bureaucracy.
These economic successes were achieved at the cost of frightful sacrifices by the toiling masses. Most of these could have been avoided had a genuine proletarian leadership remained at the head of the regime instead of the reactionary bureaucracy. Nevertheless these successes, achieved despite and against Stalin’s regime, constituted on the economic plane another irrefutable justification of the October revolution. They demonstrated in action the vast possibilities and the great future that socialism has in store for mankind.
Today these same economic successes, gained by the Soviet masses on the foundations established by October, are manifesting themselves on the battlefront. Thus, under the most adverse conditions, debilitated by Stalinism, completely exposed to the full striking power of German militarism under conditions most advantageous to the latter, the strangled revolution is showing to the whole world that it still lives on.
Bolshevism (revolutionary socialism), Bolshevik theory and Bolshevik practice were put to the crucial test first, not in a number of advanced countries with advanced economy, but in one of the most backward countries of the world. All the adversaries of Bolshevism, all the apologists for capitalism conveniently forget this in their fraudulent “analyses” of the conquests of October.
We repeat, no conditions could be more unfavorable than these:

a decimated working class;
a ravaged and backward country;
the stabilization of the mortal and active enemy, the world bourgeoisie, after the post-war crisis (thanks to the treachery of the Second International and the weakness and immaturity of the then newly-founded Third International) which meant:
the complete isolation of the young workers’ republic.

When and where was any rising social system submitted to such a merciless environment? The rising capitalist class began under far more favorable conditions; it was able from the beginning to draw on the resources of the world.
But that is not all. In addition to all this, the new social order was compelled after 1924 to demonstrate its vitality under the supervision of a bureaucracy which adopted false and ruinous policies, which ruthlessly disregarded everything save its own privileges and power, and which suppressed and destroyed every creative, independent and critical voice.
Today the Soviet Union is confronted with the gravest crisis since its foundation. It is compelled to struggle through this crisis just as it passed through all the previous stages in its history, that is, under the most adverse conditions.
 
What Stalin Destroyed
The Soviet Union is now waging war without the aid of the institutions created by Lenin and the Russian revolution. Stalin and the bureaucracy have destroyed those institutions:
 
THE BOLSHEVIK PARTY. Lenin attached tremendous significance to the so-called Old Guard of Bolshevism. He regarded these men – the living embodiment of the experience of three revolutions (1905, February 1917, October 1917), of the struggle against World War I, of the Civil War, the post-war period of reconstruction (War Communism, the NEP, etc.) – as the only guarantee of correct policies. “If we do not close our eyes to reality, then it must be recognized,” he wrote in a letter addressed to Molotov and intended for the Central Committee in March 1922, “that at the present time the proletarian policy of our party is determined not so much by its social composition as by the enormous and unlimited authority of that thin layer which may be called the Old Guard. Even a minor internal struggle within this layer would suffice if not to undermine, then, in any case, to weaken its authority to such an extent that the decisions would thereafter no longer depend upon it.”
Stalin destroyed that entire generation of the Old Guard. All of Lenin’s closest collaborators – Zinoviev, Kamenev, Bukharin, Rykov, Serebryakov, I.N. Smirnov, Piatakov, Preobrazhensky, and countless others – were murdered during the infamous Moscow Frameups (1935-1938). Thousands of others were destroyed, driven to suicide, imprisoned or jailed in bloody purges. This fate was suffered also by the generation which had raised Stalin to power and carried on its shoulders the brunt of the industrialization.
Stalin climaxed these crimes by the murder of Leon Trotsky last August.
Since February of this year, the Russian Communist Party has been demoted from its supposedly predominant position. The war discloses its non-existence. Not simply its local and regional units, but even the once all-powerful Politbureau, of which Stalin is General Secretary, has been completely shunted aside. No statement on the war has been issued in the name of that party which under Lenin held congress after congress under conditions of complete democracy in the very midst of the civil war.
 
THE YOUTH. The youth constitutes a driving force in every significant struggle. The original party of Bolshevism in Czarist illegality was composed predominantly of young workers. The role of the youth in October and in the Civil War hardly requires comment. The young soldiers of the Soviet Union are now bearing the brunt of the Nazi onslaught. All the more important, therefore, is the Communist Youth. But the Komsomols – the Russian YCL – were erased as a political organization in 1936. Even the Dean of Canterbury admits the real reason: Stalin removed “political power from the Komsomols, i.e. from the Young Communist League – when they were challenging the party itself as an organ of political power.” (The Soviet Power, page 305)
Stalin’s persecution of the youth matches in savagery the persecution of the Old Guard. In May 1940, over 70 per cent of the youth leaders of the many times “reorganized” Komsomol were again purged. Not even a skeletal structure of Komsomols now remains in the agricultural areas. There is only the top apparatus welded to the petty bourgeoisie and the embryonic agricultural bourgeoisie of the “millionaire kolkhozi.”
 
THE SOVIETS. The October revolution revealed the Soviets – the Councils of Workers, Soldiers, Agricultural Laborers and Farmers – as the most natural, most efficient and most democratic form of government in the transition period between capitalism and socialism. Lenin hailed the Soviets as a million times more democratic than any bourgeois parliamentary republic. And this was true of the Soviets under Lenin and Trotsky. They played a central role in the Civil War, which could never have been won without them. They welded the alliance between the workers and the toiling peasantry against all the exploiters. The Soviets assisted and facilitated the work of the Revolutionary Military Council. The mobilization of draftees in the Civil War was carried out by them. The Soviets conducted a struggle against deserters; they collected foodstuffs, raw materials, supplies, etc.; they dealt with the violators of the revolutionary law and order, aided in crushing counter-revolutionary uprisings.
The very necessity today of explaining the crucial meaning and importance of Soviets in the life of a workers’ state is in itself an indication of Stalin’s terrible work of destruction. The Soviets have long been abolished and are no longer alive, even in name. Stalin’s “constitution,” which eliminated the Soviets, has itself been jettisoned. The Kremlin pays no attention to it. The “Supreme Council,” supposedly the highest power of the land, was not summoned during the war emergency. Even its Presidium has played no part in recent times.
 
THE TRADE UNIONS. Lenin and the Bolsheviks regarded the trade unions as a school of Communism, and as one of the institutions through which the workers ruled in factories and in the Soviets. Democracy in the trade unions was for Lenin an indispensable condition for the preservation and advancement of the workers’ state. The Tenth Congress of the Soviet Trade Unions took place in 1932. And since that time there has been no congress. The only body that has met since is the handpicked and repeatedly purged Executive Committee. The trade union bureaucracy, reconstituted after the bloodbath of 1935–1938, was purged again during 1940, and all authority in the industrial enterprises was concentrated in the hands of the directors. The trade unions were not even summoned to increase production in the war emergency. They issued no manifesto. The increases were demanded by ukase from the top. The work day has been prolonged to 11 hours.
The trade unions have been rendered as silent as the destroyed party, the suppressed Komsomols, the “Supreme Council of the Soviets,” not to mention the Third International together with its “helmsman,” Dimitrov.
It would carry us too far afield to enumerate all of Stalin’s crimes and abominations against the Soviet people. No “Fifth Column” could have caused greater havoc, could have done more to undermine and endanger the defensive position of the USSR than did Stalin’s regime.
Three years before the battle was joined, Stalin dealt the Red Army a far greater blow than any yet delivered by Hitler’s Panzer divisions. To grasp what Stalin did, one need only imagine the effect were the German High Command to announce that it had captured or killed 90 per cent of the Soviet General Staff.
Stalin destroyed the General Staff he had himself appointed in 1935. He executed the flower of the Airforce and Naval command. He then proceeded to purge not less than 30,000 officers. Yet scoundrels are not lacking to acclaim that these were measures for “strengthening the USSR.” This process of beheading the Red Army is still continuing. And scoundrels continue to acclaim. Instead of freeing from the jails and concentration camps the thousands of devoted, experienced Red officers who organized, led, and mechanized the Red Army, Stalin keeps them imprisoned. Now, when the need for such men is most acute, he keeps them in prison and places the military struggle in charge of those whom he himself considers as incompetent.
At the very beginning of the conflict, he removed the three generals in charge of the Leningrad, Moscow and Kiev districts. If they were unfit after the struggle began, why were they appointed in the first place? Obviously, not for military but political reasons. A removal of commanders in the midst of conflict can serve to weaken and not strengthen the morale of troops. Should the German High Command be reshuffled, the Kremlin would be the loudest in pointing out the significance of such a move.
Those removed were replaced by Timoshenko, Voroshilov and Budenny. For Timoshenko, who was Minister of War and Commander-in-Chief of all the Red Armies, this appointment is a demotion. This step cleared the road for Stalin’s assumption of supreme command a few days later. Budenny and Voroshilov have been out of active military service for the past year. Budenny remains the illiterate cavalry commander he was in the Civil War without any ability as a strategist. Voroshilov’s incapacity was acknowledged by his removal as Commander-in-Chief after the Finnish events in 1940. Stalin now places them in charge of the other two strategic sectors as a political measure: to guarantee Stalin’s personal control over the army. In war, as in peace, he carries on his politics in the Red Army.
To wage the war successfully, it is necessary to summon forth the maximum energies of the people, but Stalin has no confidence in the masses. Instead of relaxing his personal dictatorship and giving the masses room in which to develop their resources and abilities, he concentrates still more authority in his own hands. One of his first moves was to form a “Defense Council,” i.e., a War Cabinet of five men; the four in addition to himself, Berya (the demoted and then hastily reappointed head of the GPU), Molotov (the demoted Premier), Voroshilov (the demoted Commander-in-Chief), and one Malenkov, are all discredited nonentities. The members of this “Council” were chosen not for their outstanding abilities as organizers and leaders, but for the opposite reason. None could become Stalin’s rival. They remain what they always were: puppets without any popular backing who have no choice but to go along with Stalin.
Stalin’s ability as a military leader and strategist is a fiction. With the mass of the Red Army, the greater portion of whom, both men and officers, received their training under Tukhachevsky, Yakir, Uborevich and other heroes of the Civil War, the real organizers and mechanizers of the Army – Stalin’s status is, to put it mildly, not that of a military genius. The ranks must be profoundly disturbed by Stalin’s moves. They must ask themselves what happened to the “glorious” generals raised to power only a year ago, in May 1940? why this constant shift of their commanders? where the officers are who led and trained them? why are they not released from the prisons?
Stalin knows that these and a thousand similar questions are being asked in the Red Army. The restoration of the political commissars in the army, after their complete disgrace and removal last year, Stalin’s assumption of the high command, his shifts of commanders, etc. – these are preventive measures. They represent Stalin’s desperate attempts to lace the Red Army into his totalitarian straightjacket and insure his control.
 
The Morale of the Rank-and-File
The problem of maintaining morale is the most vital of all military problems. This was positively demonstrated by the triumph of Trotsky’s Red Army against superior forces in 1918–1921. This was negatively demonstrated in the debacle of the French army last year. The Civil War in Spain shows us how initially high morale can be destroyed from within. Everyone testifies to the extraordinarily high morale of the Spanish workers in the first period of the fight against Franco, but the reactionary policies of the Popular Front regime – supported and abetted by the Kremlin – sapped that morale to nothingness.
The Red Army is made up of workers and peasants. The overwhelming majority of the soldiers now engaged in action are proletarian. The peasants, however, constitute the bulk of the reserve. The support of the proletariat is the strongest pillar of the Soviet army and of the Soviet Union. The outbreak of the war brought a resurgence of proletarian consciousness and militancy on a broad basis, but this awakening class spirit carried within itself a threat to Stalin’s personal power. That is why Stalin has acted, as always, to stifle proletarian enthusiasm.
By restoring all the reactionary practices of the Czarist army, from the creation of ranks to the military salute, Stalin opened an unbridgeable gulf between the officers corps and the rank-and-file. In place of conscious proletarian discipline, he has instituted a totalitarian police discipline inside the army, giving the officers absolute power over the lives and liberties of the men. Everything was done to enhance the prestige of the officers corps at the expense of the morale of the men. By eliminating the Communist Party nuclei in the army units, Stalin has further concentrated the power of the officers corps over the rank and file.
Stalin intends to continue his blood purge under wartime conditions above all in the Army. With this difference, of course, that the military tribunals and secret courts martial will supersede “public” trials and “public” methods. Beyond a shadow of doubt this is one of the chief functions of the “political commissars,” i.e. special GPU agents. The butchery of the GPU in Spain is to be repeated on a vaster scale in the USSR.
Conditions behind the lines serve still further to infuriate the soldiers. The Moscow papers report the flight of the bureaucrats from exposed points to safe refuge. The exodus of the families of bureaucrats towards the Urals while the inhabitants of Moscow, Leningrad and Kiev are exposed to air bombardments cannot fail to have its effect. In the industrial enterprises the workers are being driven beyond human endurance. The full weight of the Stalinist regime presses down upon the proletariat, piling burden upon burden upon them without giving them a single concession which would make their situation more tolerable.
Where every channel of self-expression is choked, where the GPU rules, the workers’ morale cannot remain at the heights.
The situation is even worse with regard to the peasants. The Soviet regime has always rested upon an alliance between the proletariat and the peasant masses. The stability of the regime greatly depends upon the support accorded it by the peasants. This is also true of the stability of the army, and especially of its predominantly peasant reserves.
The collectives conceal the profound class differentiation among the various sections of the rural population. Hidden within the collectives are not only agricultural laborers and poor peasants but also petty-bourgeois elements controlling the collectives and even budding bourgeois in the person of “millionaire kolkhozniks”. The agricultural aristocracy now controls the countryside.
No organized counter-weight to these reactionary bourgeois tendencies exists in the rural area. The committees of poor peasants, which existed during the Civil War, do not exist now. The party has become completely demobilized.
While Stalin shackles the progressive forces, all the reactionary elements in Soviet society are coming to the fore. The Russian Orthodox Church holds masses for victory in Moscow, its Archbishops bless the war, and these events are proudly featured in the Stalinist press the world over.
The Kremlin fosters nationalism; Stalin even attempts to revive a feudal spirit. Holy Russia has replaced in his propaganda the internationalist outlook which led to the creation of the Union of Soviet Republics.
Stalin’s foreign policy is unambiguously reactionary. Just as in the first period of the war Stalin staked all upon his alliance with Hitler, so now he stakes the salvation of his regime upon the aid of the bourgeois imperialist “democracies.” Now, as before, Stalin entirely disregards the independent role and needs of the world working class. Internationalism, the guiding line of Bolshevik policy, is as alien to Stalin as it is to any petty-bourgeois bureaucrat in the democratic capitalist countries.
In accordance with his policy of dependence upon imperialist democracy, the Moscow radio has dropped the slogan Workers of the World Unite” for the slogan of Democracy against Fascism.
Stalin’s subservience to the Anglo-American imperialists has its most disastrous consequence among the German masses. Stalin aids Churchill and Roosevelt and Hitler by depicting the Soviet-German conflict not as a class war between two antagonistic social systems, but as an integral part of the holy crusade of the “democracies” against the German people. In this way, he helps rivet the German masses to Hitler’s war machine instead of driving a revolutionary wedge between the Nazis and the German workers.
 
What the Nazis Failed to Understand
Fully apprised of the terrible wounds that had been dealt to the Red Army by the Kremlin, the German High Command confidently expected to shatter its ranks. It failed to understand that the regime of the Kremlin is not identical with the Soviet Union.
It is not Stalin’s Red Army that has successfully resisted the first two Nazi offensives. It is the Red Army of the October revolution. It is Trotsky’s Red Army, which was built in the fire of the Civil War, built not from the wreckage of the old Czarist armies but completely anew – unlike any other army in history.
The name of Leon Trotsky is inseparably bound up with the formation, the life and victories of the Red Army. The Kremlin’s falsifications, lies, calumnies and crimes have as their aim to expunge from the memory of mankind Trotsky’s role in the building of the Red Army in the epic period of the Civil War. But no power on earth, least of all that of Stalin, will succeed in obscuring the fact that Leon Trotsky, in addition to all his other incalculable gifts and achievements, established himself as one of the greatest military leaders and strategists of all time.
Every great military leader reveals his stature above all as organizer. Lenin’s verdict was that “in the organization of the Red Army were most brilliantly realized the consistency and firmness of proletarian leadership in an alliance of workers with the toiling peasantry against all exploiters.”
In Lenin’s opinion this was the basic reason for the ability of the Red Army to defeat its formidable and far more powerful enemies.
The ideas, traditions and lessons of this army, born in the crucible of the revolution, were continued after Lenin’s death. Trotsky remained as Commissar of War until 1925. His successor, Frunze, one of the outstanding and most capable military leaders, carried on his policy and methods. When Frunze died under the most mysterious circumstances, Voroshilov was appointed in his place, but only as a figurehead. The real work of directing, mechanizing and modernizing the Red Army, drafting the plans of defense, constructing the defense lines both in Siberia and on the European frontier, was in the hands of those who had constituted Trotsky’s General Staff. That is to say, for 13 years after Trotsky’s removal the Red Army continued on the foundations he had laid down. The successes of industrialization still further strengthened the Red Army’s fighting power.
Stalin’s personal and destructive intervention in the Red Army begins only in 1937–1938. In the three years since then Stalin could not undo the achievements of two decades. It is these surviving forces that are making themselves felt today in battle.
The resistance to the Nazi armies has been achieved, like the previous success in industrialization, by a tremendous exertion on the part of the masses, at a terrible cost. On the part of the Kremlin there has been as usual only the maximum of interference, inefficiency, false and ruinous policies, ruthless oppression, lack of foresight, lack of leadership. Inside the USSR the war can only provide an impulse to rid the people and the Army from the dead hand of totalitarian control.
The working class of Russia proved itself powerful beyond anyone’s expectations. But its powers are not inexhaustible. It cannot alone withstand the assault of imperialism. Today more than ever before it needs the help of the world working class.
Bourgeois commentators are accustomed to separate political policy from military affairs and to oppose them to each other. They treat them as two independent departments of social activity without essential connections with each other. During wartime, they say, politics takes a subordinate place. Military considerations become predominant.
This view is not only contrary to fact but fatal as a guide to revolutionary policy. War does not demote politics to a secondary status in national or international life. It raises political questions to a new and higher level of importance. The military struggle is the main defensive arm of the regime, the people, or the social system engaged in combat. But the military forces involved are directed and controlled by political agencies. The policy of these agencies, therefore, becomes decisive in determining the methods of waging war and in deciding its outcome. War, as Trotsky said, is the most concentrated form of politics.
The present war is the second struggle of the Soviet Union against imperialist attack and internal counter-revolution. These two struggles have been and are being conducted under entirely different leaderships by entirely different methods and around diametrically different programs.
Since the Civil War of 1918–1921, the Soviet Union and the Red Army have become far stronger, materially speaking, but they have become far weaker from a social and political standpoint. The totalitarian regime of Stalin, which completely controls all organs of power and dictates the policies and means of struggle, is the greatest internal obstacle to the efforts of the Russian workers and peasants to defend their regime successfully against the imperialist robbers.
“War,” said Clausewitz, “is the continuation of politics by other means.” This maxim applies with full force to the Stalinist regime. Stalin, the uncrowned Czar in the Kremlin, expresses now the same conservative nationalistic outlook that has characterized all his political actions, beginning with the theory of socialism in one country, culminating in the 1935-1938 mass purges and the series of defeats and retreats on the international arena which paved the way for Hitler’s ascendancy in Germany and Europe and his assault upon the USSR.
The key measures which would strengthen the defensive power of the USSR, but which might threaten Stalin’s power, he rejects out of hand – indeed, never seriously considers. For these measures – release of all pro-Soviet political prisoners, revival of the Soviets, trade union democracy, etc. – are a threat to the bureaucracy. Stalin knows that to restore the workers and peasants to their rightful place in Soviet society entails the downfall of his regime.
The apologists for Stalin counterpose his “realism” to the “revolutionary romanticism” and “adventurism” of the Trotskyists.
It is now, however, clear to the whole world that the course pursued by Stalin in the past fifteen years in the name of realism and under the charter of Socialism in One Country has led the Soviet Union to the brink of the abyss. In actuality, Stalinist “realism” is nothing but bureaucratic blindness based upon national conservatism. The Stalinist regime took as the guiding line of its policy the preservation and promotion of the privileges of a small bureaucratic caste, no matter what the cost to the international socialist revolution, proletarian democracy and the real needs of the Soviet people.
The distinguishing characteristic of Stalinism in all spheres of thought and action is its narrow horizon, so typical of the petty-bourgeoisie. Despite his bragging pretensions, Stalin has been content with little things. It did not matter to him what catastrophes were visited upon the rest of the world proletariat because of his ruinous politics, so long as his own rule was not directly and immediately imperiled. The salvation of his personal power – that is Stalin’s supreme law.
The war imposes great tasks upon the Soviet people. It imposes tremendous obligations upon the proletarian revolutionists. To comprehend these tasks and to solve them it is necessary to have the broadest perspectives; to act in the most daring and resolute manner. The present conflict involves the peoples of the entire world. The people of the first workers’ state are part of the vanguard of the world revolution. Only with this perspective can the Soviet Union be properly defended and the world revolution revived.
 
Why A Political Revolution Is Necessary
The advocacy by Trotskyists of the political overthrow of the Stalinist regime must be viewed within the framework of this perspective of international revolution. It formulates the deepest need of the Soviet peoples. It sets forth the goal of their instinctive striving – to find a way out of the blind alley into which Stalinism has flung them. In stressing the inevitability of the overturn of Stalinist totalitarianism, we provide these masses in advance with the fundamental answer to their most urgent problems.
It must be remembered that revolutions are net made by propaganda, agitation or slogans. They are brought about by the action of vast masses, impelled by burning necessity, to satisfy their needs against those who stand in their way. A political overturn effected by the Soviet masses, which would restore Soviet democracy and get rid of Stalin’s iniquitous regime, would provide the most potent defense of the USSR, would lead to the extension of October throughout Europe and Asia, and erase fascism from the earth.
Stalin’s regime weakens the Soviet Union in the fight against the imperialists. The sharp caste distinction and inequalities introduced by the Kremlin produce discontent and strengthen centrifugal tendencies within the Army. Instead of reinforcing its morale, the nationalist demagogy of the Kremlin serves to shatter the class cohesiveness of the Army. Such slurring over of the class struggle disarms the proletariat and the poor peasantry in the face of their class adversaries, and acts as a cover for the most reactionary sections and counterrevolutionary tendencies among the population.
A great danger looms from within the peasantry. They have neither forgotten nor forgiven the crimes of forced collectivization, the famines of 1931-1932, the Draconic decrees of 1940–1941 when the Kremlin reverted to forced grain collections. These repressive measures have served to estrange the peasants not only from the Stalin regime, but also from the working class.
We defend the Soviet Union even under Stalin. But that must not mean that we blind ourselves to the mortal danger which confronts the Soviet Union if Stalin remains in control.
All the efforts of the Trotskyists are directed toward defeating Hitler’s onslaught against the Soviet Union. It is necessary to free the Soviet Union from the dead hand of Stalinism in order to assure the victory of the first workers’ state.
 






(This is the second of a series of articles on conditions in the Soviet Union today, based on the first number of consecutive issues of Moscow newspapers available in this country in almost a year.)



* * *
The Soviet Union was placed under martial law on June 22, the day Hitler started his invasion. Military authorities now rule supreme. No one is permitted to enter or leave Moscow. Workers who live in the suburbs of Moscow must obtain special permits to go to their jobs in the city. (Pravda, June 26).
But even martial law is not rigorous enough for Stalin’s requirements. After two weeks of war, on July 5, he issued a special ukase virtually forbidding people to talk! The text of this ukase, issued in the name of the Presidium of the Supreme Council of the USSR, follows:
“It is hereby decreed that whoever is guilty of spreading in wartime false rumors arousing alarm among the populace shall be sentenced by verdict of the courts martial to a term of 2 to 5 years in prison, unless the nature of the crime is such as carries with it a severer penalty by law.” (Pravda, July 6)
With this ukase Stalin has, in effect, scrapped the Stalinist “Constitution” with all its “guarantees”. The military tribunals – the courts martial – are the sole judges of the distinction, If any, between “free speech” and “false rumor.”
Even the judges are instructed in advance. The Secretary of Propaganda of the Moscow District Committee of the Communist Party elucidated the ukase as follows:
“Especially intolerable today ... are general discussions, empty and abstract babble ... In accordance with the new ukase of the Presidium of the Supreme Council of the USSR it is necessary to conduct the most ruthless struggle against the disseminators of false rumors arousing alarm among the populace. Our work must be directed toward the extirpation of spies and diversionists, the exposure of panicky people, provocateurs, etc.”
It will be observed that the Secretary of Propaganda makes no distinction whatever between a “babbler” and a “spy”; between “panicky people” and “diversionists.” They are lumped together along with “disseminators of false rumors,” “provocateurs”, etc. Perhaps this is merely an excess of zeal? Pravda itself hastens to dispel any illusions on this score in a leading editorial.
“Fascist plunderers,” thunders Pravda, “are trying to employ the methods of diversionism and espionage on the broadest scale imaginable. The fascist cutthroats are outfitting their spies and diversionists with uniforms of militia-men and Red soldiers. They try to invest them with the appearance of Soviet citizens.”
 
Trying to Separate Worker and Soldier
Anyone wearing the uniform of the Red Army is thus a potential suspect.
“It would be a mistake,” continues Pravda, “to think that the enemy is sending his diversionists and spies only behind the lines close to the front The fascist barbarians are trying to penetrate deep into the interior in order to perpetrate their black deeds here.”
Obviously, the Kremlin wants to erect an impenetrable barrier of suspicion between soldiers and civilians. To engage a soldier in conversation is to run the risk of being charged with contacting an agent of the enemy. But that is not all. The Kremlin wants no discussions of spy kind, neither among soldiers nor among civilians. Pravda makes no bones about it:
“NO UNNECESSARY CONVERSATIONS, NO SUPERFLUOUS WORDS! THE BABBLER IS THE FIRST ASSISTANT OF THE SPY AND DIVERSIONIST.” (Pravda, July 13)
In order to illustrate that the GPU alone is equipped to pass judgment on the character of conversations, Pravda featured the case of a Soviet worker.
“On June 25,” says Pravda, “one Ts. was doing some repair work in a house on one of the central streets of Moscow ... Ts. deported himself very freely, and wishing to show off that he was a ‘well-informed person’ told the housewife all sorts of fantastic nonsense.”
We interrupt at this point to explain that Pravda is not at all enraged by the fact a Soviet worker was kept busy repairing an apartment instead of being engaged in defense work. Workers do not live in houses in the center of Moscow. The house in question was not at all an ordinary house, but that of a bureaucrat. And the “housewife”, obviously, was the wife of an important person. Could anything be more suspicious than a worker feeling at ease in such circumstances? The “housewife” immediately reported this most suspicious behavior to the police.
“The investigation proved,” emphasizes Pravda, “that Ts. was systematically engaged in counterrevolutionary agitation among the workers in the building trades, and was trying to sow panic.”
What greater criminal could there be than a worker who thinks he can deport himself “freely” or “show off” how much he knows in public? To jail with the counter-revolutionist! The bureaucratic mind remains the same in war as in peace. Today these contemptible parasites feel themselves besieged on all sides. As always, their only answer is – more repressions.
 
GPU Wants Help
Pravda concludes its revealing story with this warning:
“The duty of every Soviet patriot, of every citizen of our great fatherland is actually to help the organs of state security (i.e., the GPU) to apprehend spies and their assistants.” (Pravda, July 19)
The GPU finds itself overworked. The only ones “actually” helping are the privileged “housewives”.
It is clear that the Soviet masses are becoming more and more alarmed about the continued advance of the Fascist armies. With the most rigorous censorship it is impossible to suppress news of defeats. Such news circulates of necessity by word of mouth. The official communications tell nothing.
In this connection the role of the so-called Bureau of Information is especially significant. The impression has been deliberately created that this “service” has been set up primarily to supply news for foreign consumption. That is not its primary function. The communiqués issued by this Bureau set the limits within which Soviet citizens can discuss the war. Everything which goes beyond what is specified in its bulletins is – “false rumor”, “panic-mongering”, “aid to spies and diversionists”, etc.
This is made very explicit by Pravda:
“The widest popularization of the dispatches of the Soviet Information Bureau must be counterposed to all sorts of rumors and petty gossip which might work hand-in-hand with the enemy.” (Pravda, July 17)
 
Discussion Limited – to Official Line
In the same article we find the following:
“Popularization of episodes from the exploits in battle of our glorious Red Army, exposure of the myth of the invincibility of the Fascist German Army, stories of the bravery of Red guerilla fighters, accounts of the unheard of bestialities of fascists – this is the material with which the agitators must go to the population.”
Here is a verification of the fact pointed out by Natalia Sedov Trotsky, namely, that Stalin is utilizing guerilla warfare with all its disproportionate sacrifices in order to distract public attention away from the lack of leadership, the absence of a unified strategic plan in Stalin’s conduct of the war.
The increasing isolation of the Kremlin from the masses is evidenced by the fact that Stalin distrusts even his own agents. The above-cited instruction to the agitators concludes with this well-nigh incredible admonition: “Be a militant patriot not only during discussion periods and at party meetings but also under all other circumstances.”
 
Bureaucrats Fear the Youth
The pages of the Stalinist press further reveal that the Kremlin fears the reaction of the youth, especially the Komsomols – the Russian YCL. The defeats of the Red Army have stunned the Soviet Youth more than any other section of the population. The youth had been duped by the Stalinist boasts of the invincibility of the Soviet armed forces. Events are now pounding the truth into their minds. Many of them half-accepted the beheading of the Red Army during the monstrous Moscow frameups and blood purges as having “safeguarded” the defensive strength of the USSR. They are now witnessing the disastrous consequences of Stalin’s crimes.
The initial period of confusion caused by the blows of events was undoubtedly followed by anxious doubts and questionings. The secretary of the Komsomols publicly warned the youth:
“There must be no indulgences to panicky people and tail-endists. All whisperers and whimperers who hinder our great struggle must be resolutely exposed.” (Pravda, June 28)
 
“Explaining” the Defeats
To counteract the growing doubt and alarm, the Kremlin attempted at the beginning to ex plain the defeats away by pleading that the “treacherous enemy” had caught the Red Army unprepared. But once the full strength of the the Red Army was mobilized, the enemy would be halted and crushed. In his July 3 speech Stalin worded his alibi as follows:
“As regards the fact that a part of our territory has nevertheless been occupied by the German Fascist troops, the chief explanation for this is that the war of Fascist Germany against the USSR began under conditions advantageous to the German troops and disadvantageous to the Soviet troops.”
Taking this as its cue, Pravda kept promising:
“If as a result of the first days of resistance by the Red Army, when it was still far from mobilized, ‘the best divisions of the German Fascist Army have been destroyed by our army, then this means that the Hitlerite Fascist Army can also be smashed, and it will be smashed just like the armies of Napoleon and Kaiser Wilhelm’ (STALIN).” (Pravda, July 4)
These “explanations” only made things worse. By proclaiming that Hitler had caught him by surprise Stalin publicly acknowledged his own stupidity. His prestige, his pretensions to infallibility could not fail to suffer thereby. Moreover, if the “best” Nazi divisions had been destroyed, as Stalin claimed, then it was the inferior German divisions which kept advancing against the fully organized might of the Red Army, with Stalin as Commissar for Defense. Commander-in-Chief, etc., etc. How could that happen? The Kremlin stopped explaining and issued the gag law of July 6. The less talk the better. Even the Pravda has had to reduce from six pages to four pages. This reduction in Pravda’s size was officially explained as due to a “considerable increase in circulation.” The broader Stalin’s public, the less it must be given to read.
 



On the old western battlefields of the Civil War of 1918–1920 the Red Army and the Soviet masses are now waging the second revolutionary war in modern times. The initial phases of this titanic struggle are taking place under the leadership of Stalin and his clique of usurpers who are doing everything in their power to lace the revolutionary war into the Kremlin’s bureaucratic straitjacket. But this does not and cannot alter the class nature of the Nazi-Soviet conflict. The Russian revolution is now inscribing into the pages of history the second great chapter of its military struggle against world imperialism and world counter-revolution.
Only those who cannot read the language of history will fail to understand the meaning of the heroism and unconquerable spirit of the Soviet fighters who are kindling a new hope in the hearts of the oppressed all over the world. The greatest conquests of October still live! And one of the crucial achievements of the revolution was the construction of the Red Army.
The Red Army always was and will always remain associated with the names of the great leaders of Bolshevism, Lenin and Trotsky. Not only the leadership in organizing and building the army, but the initiative for its formation came from Leon Trotsky. He was the untiring inspirer of every decisive step taken in this direction. The decree instituting universal compulsory military training was adopted on April 22, 1918 by the All-Russian Central Executive Committee of the Soviets on the basis of Trotsky’s report to this body. Within two weeks after the formation of the Supreme Military Council in March, 1918, Trotsky was appointed its Chairman. When this body was superseded in September by the Revolutionary Military Council, he remained Chairman.
Precisely because Trotsky’s name is inseparably bound up with the formation and life of the Red Army, its history has been suppressed or falsified. The great lessons of its construction have been trampled underfoot; its role in the life of the Soviet power completely obscured. Those who understand nothing of Marxism are free to reduce the problem of the Red Army to purely military terms. For us, the military achievements of the USSR are inextricably bound up with class forces and class politics. The Red Army represents one of the great political conquests of Bolshevism.
 
The Social Role of the Red Army
Like every army, the Red Army is not something separate and apart from the state but, on the contrary, constitutes the very quintessence of the Soviet state which, in its turn, represents a new and an unprecedented form of political power. Without the essential organ of the Red Army the workers’ state could not have endured for more than a few months. It could never have survived the years of Stalinist rule. Again, this should not be understood in a purely military sense. In the life of the workers’ state the army plays a role that is qualitatively different from the role played by military forces in a class society ruled by an exploiting minority. Bourgeois armies serve as naked instruments of coercion and oppression. The ideal soldier of the bourgeoisie is an unthinking, unquestioning, obedient automaton. It is otherwise with the Red Army and the Red soldier. Suffice it to point out that in Lenin’s lifetime and long after his death, the Red Army served as a political and cultural institution second only to the Bolshevik party. The flower of the youth and of the land received in its ranks not only military training but their political and cultural education. Furthermore, the Red Army has been practically from the beginning integrated with the productive plants of the country. Red soldiers received part of their training in industrial enterprises most closely connected with defense and, consequently, those most advanced technologically.
The colossal cultural shift thus produced through the instrumentality of the army tore vast strata of peasants from the barbarism of rural life. As a matter of fact, this prepared in large measure the ground for the future successes of industrialization. And these in turn acted to reinforce the military might of the army.
The Kremlin is of course trying to usurp credit for the heroic resistance of the Red Army, but Stalin will not succeed in this.
We Trotskyists link up the present heroic resistance of the Red soldiers directly with the Russian October and the Civil War. Whoever is astonished by the power of Soviet resistance is unaware that only the revolution unleashes forces capable of overcoming insuperable obstacles. This is being demonstrated on the battlefields today. This was most graphically illustrated in 1918 in the organization of the first victorious army of the proletarian revolution.
 
How Trotsky Built the Red Army
What did the task of building the Red Army actually involve? It involved the translation into military terms of the major political tasks of the Soviet power. As Trotsky has pointed out:
“Most of the questions of principle and the difficulties in connection with the constructive work of the Soviets during the years that followed were encountered first of all in the military sphere, and in most concentrated form at that.”
It was precisely for this reason that Lenin constantly referred to the experiences in the army at every crucial stage in the development of the Soviet Union in his lifetime. Lenin’s own estimate was that
“in the organization of the Red Army the consistency and firmness of proletarian leadership in an alliance between the workers and the toiling peasantry against all exploiters were brilliantly realized.” (Lenin’s Collected Works, volume XVII, pp. 412–414.)
The Army, like the Soviets, drew its strength from the complete confidence and support of the masses. In a letter to Lenin written in 1918 during his first trip to the front, Trotsky said,
“I am building an organization calculated for a long war. It is necessary to make this war popular. The workers must be made to feel that this is their war.”
Recalling the experience of those days, Trotsky wrote in his autobiography:
“The front ranks of the masses had to realize the mortal danger of the situation. The first requisite for success was to hide nothing, our weakness least of all; not to trifle with the masses but to call everything by its right name.”
The Red command never hesitated to bare the grim truth before the army and the country. Typical of this attitude was the order issued on October 18, 1919 during the defense of Petrograd against Yudenich, when Trotsky issued instructions: “not to send in false reports of hard fights when the actual truth was bitter panic. Lies will be punished as treason. Military work admits errors, but not lies, deception and self-deception.” In contrast to this, the Stalinist regime, which has no confidence in the masses and stands in great fear of them, always resorts to lies which the revolution invariably sought to punish as treason.
The revolution abominated the lie because the primary task was to educate and prepare the masses for socialism.
“For us,” wrote Trotsky, “the tasks of education in socialism were closely integrated with those of fighting. Ideals that enter the mind under fire remain there securely and forever.”
In the crucible of the Civil War, millions upon millions became indoctrinated with internationalism and devotion to the workers’ state. This tradition was so strong that it was of necessity continued in the training of other millions in subsequent years, even after the Stalinist degeneration of the Soviet Union set in. For instance, when M.M. Landa, the then editor of Red Star, official organ of the Red Army, wrote a pamphlet (which was translated into many languages) in 1934 on the Red Army, he cited Stalin himself as the authority for the fact that:
“The strength of the Red Army lies in this, that from the first days of its birth it has been brought up in the spirit of internationalism.”
At the first session of the First World Congress of the Comintern on March 2, 1919, Trotsky delivered a report on the Red Army in which he said to the assembled delegates:
“I can assure you that the worker-communists who comprise the core of this army feel that they are not only the guard of the Russian Socialist Republic but also the Red Army of the Third International.”
Fifteen years later Stalin, who had meanwhile betrayed internationalism, still found himself compelled to render it lip service because this tradition was so deeply ingrained, above all in the army.
Nor was the influence of the army limited to its own ranks. One of the chief functions of the Komsomols – the Russian Young Communist League – was work in connection with building up the army and the fleet. This close connection between the youth and the armed forces was undoubtedly one of the reasons for the political expropriation of the youth by the Kremlin in 1936, when the Komsomols was transformed into a non-political organization.
Furthermore, the regular army was supplemented by territorial militias and by such civilian bodies as Ossoaviakhim (Society for Assistance in Defense and in Aviation-Chemical Construction) which spread similar education among additional millions.
This cement of the class struggle which originally constituted the cement of the Red Army is what holds its ranks together today, despite the havoc wrought by Stalinism. 
The Problem of the Red Army Command
The army was the first complex social mechanism that was completely reconstituted by the revolution. The problem which arose immediately and acutely was that of an administrative staff, i. e., the command, without which this complex mechanism could not be attained. The masses themselves could not possibly supply this staff inasmuch as they lacked training, experience, and the very habits of exercising authority. Qualified commanders could come in the beginning primarily from the ranks of the former ruling classes, first and foremost, from the old Czarist officerdom. This problem of putting the bourgeoisie and its technical and administrative staff to work for the revolution was especially acute in a country so backward as Russia. But even in the most advanced countries, after the downfall of the bourgeoisie, it will be solved much in the same way that the Bolsheviks did, namely, by first smashing ruthlessly all attempts at sabotage and then offering employment to the members of the deposed classes.
In his recollections of Lenin, written shortly after his death in 1924, Trotsky relates how the question of military specialists arose almost immediately after the seizure of power. The General Staff occupied at the time one of the rooms in the Smolny.
“It was the most chaotic of all institutions,” wrote Trotsky. “One could never find out just who issued orders, just who was in command and just what was commanded. Here for the first time the question arose, in its general form, of military specialists. We had already had certain experience on this score in the struggle against Krasnov, when we appointed (the former Czarist) colonel Muraviev as commander-in-chief. To Muraviev were attached four sailors and one soldier with instruction to keep both eyes open and their revolvers cocked. This was the embryo of the commissar system. And this experience to a certain degree served as the basis in creating the Supreme Military Council.
“‘Without serious and experienced military men we shall never get out of this chaos,’ I would say to Vladimir Ilyich after each visit to the Staff.
“‘From the look of things, that’s so. But suppose they betray ...’
“‘We shall attach a commissar to each one of them.’
“‘And better still, let us make it two,’ exclaimed Lenin.
“And strong-armed ones at that. There cannot possibly be a dearth of strong-armed communists.’
“This was the origin of the formation of the Supreme Military Council.”
In a speech delivered on March 19, 1918 before the Moscow Soviet of Workers’, Peasants’ and Soldiers’ Deputies, Trotsky explained:
“Yes, we are utilizing military specialists. For, after all, the tasks of Soviet democracy do not at all consist of rejecting all technical forces which can be profitably used for the success of our historic work, once they have been politically subordinated to the existing regime. After all, in relation to the army, too, the whole power will remain entirely in the hands of the Soviets, who shall appoint in all military organs and military sections reliable political commissars to exercise general control. The importance of these commissars must be raised to enormous heights; their powers will be unlimited. Military specialists will direct the technical side of the work, purely military questions, operative activities, military actions, whereas the political side of forming, training and educating the sections must be wholly subordinated to the plenipotentiary representatives of the Soviet regime in the person of its commissars. There is not and there cannot be any other way out at the present time. We must remember that the struggle requires technical knowledge in addition to the enthusiasm latent in the people.”
 
Stalin’s Opposition to Trotsky’s Solution
The central issue of the “Military Opposition” was their opposition to the utilization of these military specialists. The records of this struggle have been suppressed because they hopelessly compromise Stalin and completely reveal his role as the behind-the-scenes director of the struggle of the “Military Opposition.”
Was this opposition due to mere stupidity and ignorance? On the part of individuals, inexperience and stupidity can account for a great deal. But whenever political questions are involved it is always necessary to probe down to the class roots from which most psychological reactions draw their sustenance. The opponents feared betrayal. This fear of the “specialists” in reality expressed an exaggerated estimate of the powers of the bourgeoisie and distrust in the power of the masses and of the new regime. What did this fear express, if not a typical petty-bourgeois reaction?
Commenting upon this question in a letter, Natalia Sedov Trotsky makes the following analysis:
“I remember the feverish discussion which lasted for weeks. I recall the passionate struggle conducted by L.D. jointly with V.I. (Lenin) in order to draw in specialists into the construction of the regular army. L.D.’s very first experience in this sphere convinced him that without this basic condition we could not conquer. The question of building the Red Army to replace guerrillaism was for him the life-and-death question of the revolution. The arguments of the opponents were groundless. They were based on fear of betrayal. They dragged us back to the pre-revolutionary period when at the basis of all arguments likewise lay fear – inability to take into account our own forces and possibilities. And this impelled the dissident Bolsheviks to retreat in the face of the existing and extremely favorable political situation for the seizure of power by the proletariat.”
Life itself refuted the opponents. The problem of providing the Red Army with the commanding staff was brilliantly solved through the combination of “specialists” with political commissars. Summing up the experience Lenin said in the midst of the Civil War:
“When Comrade Trotsky recently informed me that in our military department the officers are numbered in tens of thousands, I gained a concrete conception of what constitutes the secret of making proper use of our enemy ... of how to build communism out of the bricks that the capitalists had gathered to use against us.”
With the termination of the Civil War, the problem of the commanding staff assumed a different form. The revolution was now in a position to train and educate its own “specialists.” The institution of political commissars altered its character completely, becoming transformed into the Political Department of the Red Army, responsible for the political education of the troops. Trotsky remained personally in charge of this work as Commissar of War until he was removed in 1925.
 
Stalin and the Red Army Today
The bureaucratization of the Soviet Government and of the Bolshevik Party, which dates back in its beginnings to the middle of 1922, did not have its direct effect upon the army until much later. In a certain sense it is correct to say that the Red Army for years remained in a special and privileged position in relation to the rest of the apparatus. This is reflected even in the sphere of Stalinist falsifications. Only in 1929 did Stalin dare to begin “rewriting” the history of the Red Army, and even then very cautiously. So far as the commanding staff is concerned, Stalin gained its subservience but it was not peopled by his own unscrupulous and incapable flunkeys until after the blood purges of 1937–1938.
Terrible as were the blows dealt by Stalin to the Red Army, it remains the one institution least affected by his degenerated regime. This extraordinary development, which no one could have foreseen, may well play a vital role in determining the future not only of the Soviet Union but of mankind.
Events have now brought their verification to the fact that it was beyond the power of Stalinism – which proved itself capable of perverting and destroying so many of the political conquests of October  –  to undermine completely the creative work of the Red Army. Lenin and Trotsky had forged it as the sword of the world revolution. They forged so firmly and so well that while the edge of this sword has been dulled and chipped by Stalinism, its blade still remains unbroken.
We have indicated the extent to which the Red Army has survived the Stalinist degeneration of the Soviet Union. This degeneration, however, has not failed to make frightful inroads into the army. It could not have been otherwise. Every stage in the degeneration of the workers’ state found its corresponding deflection in the ranks of the army. Thus the expulsion of the proletarian vanguard from the party was preceded by the hounding of Trotskyist and other oppositional elements in the armed forces. From 1925to 1927,outstanding Civil War fightersand commanders like I.N. Smirnov (he was known as the “Lenin of Siberia”), N.I. Muralov, S.V. Mrachkovsky and countless others suffered the same fate as Trotsky and his secretariat, they were removed from their army posts and then sent either into exile or concentration camps and jail. They were later murdered by Stalin.
After 1929 when Stalin broke his bloc with Bukharin-Rykov a similar fate befell the supporters of the Right Wing. Very few of those who capitulated, former Left Oppositionists and former Right Wingers alike, were permitted to resume high military posts.
In September 1935 sweeping changes were introduced in the Red Army. The militias were greatly restricted. This weakened the direct ties between the army and the populace. The arsenals formerly in each factory were taken over by the GPU. Another terrible blow was dealt to the principles of October by the restoration of a privileged officers’ caste. All these measures were political steps taken by Stalin to tie the army more firmly to his regime.
But while he thus weakened the defensive power of the USSR, Stalin did not attain his goal. His hold on the army could not be guaranteed by “reforms.” He therefore resorted to the blood purge which struck deeply and savagely at the entire Red Command.
In the space of a single year – May 1937 to May 1938 – the Red Army was stripped almost to a man of all those commanders who had been recruited in the period of the Civil War. Purged too were those Civil War fighters who had risen from the ranks in the course of the next 15 years. The flower of the Red Army command was either shot or imprisoned as “enemies of the people” in the period of the infamous Moscow Frameups.
No other army in history ever suffered such a blow, and on the very eve of the involvement of the USSR in a major war.
The work of the Red Army in all spheres from 1925 to 1937 had been under the direction of those generals who were members of Trotsky’s original commanding staff. Tukhachevsky, Gamarnik, Yakir, Uborevich, Bluecher, Primakov (the outstanding Red Cavalry commander), Eidemann (head of the Ossoaviakhim) and others had continued, even under Stalin, to build the Red Army on the foundations laid down by Lenin and Trotsky. These men had modernized and mechanized the Red Army. They planned and constructed the fortifications in the West (the so-called Stalin line) and similar fortifications in Siberia. They drafted the mobilization plans. They prepared the strategic plans for meeting future attacks.
 
The Revolutionary Task of the Red Army
In place of these men Stalin has appointed people without revolutionary experience, without military knowledge, without prestige among the troops, and without any moral capital. These creatures owe everything to Stalin. They have no choice or desire other than to follow him. Stalin crowned his purges by abolishing the “Socialist Oath” of the Red Army, instituting new disciplinary statutes in the spirit of bourgeois armies, and elevating still another officers’ caste from corporals to Marshals, with himself as Commander-in-chief.
The war brings to its greatest intensity the contradiction between Stalin’s regime and the needs of the army which is being suffocated by his stranglehold. Every hour of struggle reveals more and more clearly the criminal inadequacy and inefficiency of Stalin and his henchmen. Thousands of Red soldiers and officers, together with other thousands of workers and peasants – specially those who have arms again – are growing ever more aware of the terrible price in terms of territory, industrial and natural resources, military equipment and manpower which the Soviet Union is now paying for the continuation of the Stalinist “leadership.”
The traditions of the Civil War are reviving. The struggle against the enemy, the entire war-time experience, imbues the Red Army with the assurance that with a qualified and revolutionary leadership, corresponding to the class nature of the war, the struggle against the Nazis could be transformed literally overnight from the defensive to an offensive. The very logic of the struggle now poses in the sharpest form to the Red Army the need of ridding the country of the bureaucratic incubus. Stalinism can lead the Red Army in the end only into the same blind alley in which it has itself arrived. The Red Army must solve this life-and-death question in order to wage a victorious revolutionary war.
 



On December 29, Stalin officially promulgated the latest of his “labor decrees,” to accompany a previous decision to “increase the productivity of labor by 25%” while cutting wages 14% and more.
The publication of this decree – which completely invalidates the labor laws of the Soviet Union introduced under Lenin in December 1922 at the beginning of the New Economic Policy – was preceded by a ritualistic campaign in the press of only two weeks duration. To believe Stalin (and the Daily Worker) it was the workers of Russia themselves who insisted on the passage of laws which are almost without parallel in reactionary labor legislation. Only the system of “fink books” is comparable to the “system of labor booklets” introduced by Stalin as a New Year’s boon, 22 years after the October Revolution.
As for the other provisions in the decree, they violate not only all previous labor legislation but “the great Stalinist Constitution” itself. And all this was headlined in the Daily Worker as follows: “SOVIET ACTS TO INCREASE SOCIALIST PRODUCTIVITY HAMPERED BY THOSE WHO ABUSE SOCIAL SECURITY.”
 
“Democratic” Procedure
The decree was issued without even a consultation of the Supreme Council which is scheduled to convene shortly. It sufficed for the passage of this law for Stalin to sign it in the name of the “Communist Party of Russia,” Molotov signed it for the “Council of People’s Commissars” (the majority of whom have been purged as “wreckers” in the past year), while Shvernik invested it with the “authority” of the All-Union Central Council of Trade Unions. And if any further proof of the legality of this decree was required, the Russian worker could turn to the pages of the latest issue of Sovetskaya Yustizia (the official organ of Vyshinsky’s Department of Justice) wherein it is proved that all former “theories of labor and labor laws in the U.S.S.R. have been permeated with capitalist counter-revolutionary spirit.” Why consult the Supreme Council on such a detail?
Article 119 of the Constitution guarantees, among other things, rest and leisure to Soviet citizens. We quote this “guarantee”: “The right to rest and leisure is ensured by ... the institution of annual vacations with pay for workers and other employees and the provision of sanatoria, rest homes and clubs serving the needs of the toilers.” But Article 119 has been improved by Stalin. Henceforth social security will be provided on the following basis: “100 per cent” only if the worker has remained “in one and the same factory or institution” for more than six years; 80 per cent if his “labor booklet” shows a record of three to six years’ stay in one and the same place; 60 per cent for two to three years and 50 per cent for anything below that. The Daily Worker heads this paragraph of the decree with the caption High Benefits.
 
Tying Workers Down
These “benefits” are indeed so high as to be inaccessible to the vast majority of Russian workers, who have been constantly migrating from factory to factory in the hope of improving their lot. In point of fact the foregoing measure, along with others, is intended in part to cope with the tremendous labor turn-over in Russia, to tie the workers down, somewhat in the manner in which the serfs were tied to the land.
Why these drastic decrees? The official explanation is very, very simple. “The overwhelming majority of workers and office employees,” declares Stalin’s preamble, “work honestly and sincerely ...” But there is a handful of “disorganizers” (it used to be “wreckers” – remember?) and it is these “individual ignorant, backward or unscrupulous people who ... cause industry, transport and the whole national economy great damage.” Stalin and his gang do not bother to explain either to the Russian workers or to the world just how these “individual” shirkers and slackers can cause “billions of damage” annually; nor just why millions of workers have to suffer for the sins of a few.
 
Workers Blamed Now
A short time ago the disorganization of industry was laid at the door of “wreckers” and “saboteurs,” especially of the “Trotskyite-Zinovievite-Bukharinite” variety. Monstrous trials were staged, and great successes were promised after the process of rooting out the “enemies of the people” had been completed. No such successes were forthcoming. And now the blame for the chaos in industry is being placed on the “disorganizers of discipline,” the “shirkers and slackers,” in other words, on the entire Russian working class. Has the bureaucracy, then, completely lost its senses? No, it is reacting to a grave emergency in its customary manner.
In the columns of the Socialist Appeal we have time and again explained the underlying economic roots for the oppressive measures, purges and frame-ups of the bureaucracy; we forecast that far from solving his internal difficulties in this way, Stalin was only laying the foundation for new pitfalls. The explanation for the latest and most drastic measures of Stalin to maintain his shaky regime is to be found in the pages of the Soviet press itself.
 
Economic Crisis
In the middle of December Soviet economic life took an abrupt plunge. Production in all spheres suddenly dropped 50 per cent and more. The only figures made public are those for the key industries, and we can only cite these. Falsified as they are, the picture they present is unmistakable. In the table below we reproduce the “plan” figures (in thousands of tons) for December together with the output during the period of “agitation” for the new labor laws:



 


“Plan”


 


Dec. 14


 


Dec. 15


 


Dec. 17


 


Dec. 19




Iron


  45.6


  37.6


  34.5


  28.0


26.0




Steel


  56.1


  44.5


  41.0


  34.8


32.6




Rolled products


  43.6


  39.1


  36.8


  28.5


25.2




Coal


390.0


356.6


347.3


294.7


?



Car loadings which had reached the daily total of 100,000 in the summer dropped from 85,000 on Dec. 13 to 50,000 on Dec. 18. The same trend is shown in all the industries for which figures are available. When this catastrophic and unprecedented drop was first made public, the official explanation was: “snowstorms.” After adding “snowdrifts” to the “storms,” they then proceeded to print even lower figures without any official alibis. Since then, all pretences have been dropped. It has been publicly admitted that the “plan” for 1938 had collapsed. The “plan” figures for January have been slashed. Production today, it is claimed, is back where it was in the early days in December, which is below the production of three years ago, i.e., in 1936!
It will be some time before we learn the whole truth about the actual occurrences in Russia in the latter part of December, and for that matter, at the present time. But it is no guess-work on our part to assert that there is no other explanation for the sudden drop in production, and the subsequent emergency legislation than this, that the Russian workers either stayed away from the plants or struck on the job by the millions. Certainly, there was also the customary phenomenon of breakdown of machinery and of production, inadequate supplies, etc. But the scope of the “breakdown” and the “steady” improvement since the low point in the middle of December can be explained only by “labor shortage.”
The fact that Pravda has been compelled to thunder against “lax executives,” the fact that it went so far as openly to admit that “certain directors are afraid to fire shirkers for fear of creating for themselves difficulties with labor supply” (Jan. 15); the additional fact that the administration has been compelled to “soften” its original regulations and permit re-employment of workers fired from a plant within six months, etc. – all these and other facts support the view that the Russian workers have entered into the phase of an open straggle against the Stalin regime, that the latter is defending itself in the only way it knows.
 



The ratification of the Stalin-Hitler pact at the fourth session of the Supreme Council in Moscow was accompanied by the passage of two laws, one extending the conscription age and the other levying a stiff tax on collective and individual farmers. The connection between the extension of the military term of service and the Stalin-Hitler alliance is self-evident. But it does seem at first sight surprising that Stalin and his clique should have chosen the moment when they are faced with their first major historical test – war – to introduce the severest legislation in recent years against that section of the population to whom they have been catering the most, that is, the peasantry.
The new agricultural tax supersedes the law passed on May 31, 1934, the primary intent of which was to assuage the peasantry, and which placed a relatively light burden on them. The new law more than doubles the tax hitherto paid by collective farmers whose income is 2,000 rubles a year. Those whose income is higher will pay three, four, five and even six times the previous amount. Furthermore, the tax falls most heavily on income derived from “privately operated holdings, handicraft enterprises, and all other income derived outside the collectives.” (Pravda, August 28)
 
Why the Legislation at This Time
Whereas the tax on collectives grades from 5% to 13.5% of the total, all income from other sources is subject to 11%–25% tax, and in some cases it is as high as 30%.
If I am not mistaken, it is the sharpest legislation enacted against the peasantry since the days of enforced collectivization. Legislation of this nature will hardly meet with the approval of the peasants, and Stalin knows it. Why then the law?
Is it because the kulak danger is abroad again? It is unquestionable that this danger exists. But even though the term “kulak” and “speculator” has reappeared in the Soviet press, that is not the reason for Stalin’s law. He has relied most heavily in recent years on the well-to-do peasant.
But the peasants, both in the collectives and outside, have again been accumulating grain and the flow of commodities from the city to the village has been far from adequate to impel the peasants to disgorge their grain hoards. There have been periodic shortages in the cities, but these have been winked at from above. Now Stalin must have foodstuffs not only for the cities but also to supply Hitler. Hence the sudden squeeze on the peasantry. Otherwise the Kremlin would be unable to live up to the terms of its agreement with Adolf Hitler, and assure the flow of foodstuffs into Germany. But to meet his obligations to Hitler, Stalin has had to deal his regime a blow internally, by alienating the peasantry.
 
Stalin Moving Toward Collisions with Peasants
It remains to be seen whether this initial law will produce the desired results. Whatever its effects, it can only act as a stop-gap. More and more grain will be required. The vast army already mobilized by Stalin will drain the accumulated grain reserves and place an additional strain on agriculture. Stalin has no other measures than administrative ones to rely upon for obtaining the foodstuffs for the cities, for the Red Army and – for Hitler. We can therefore forecast with certainty not only that increasingly harsh administrative measures will be applied but also that the Stalin regime is moving towards a head-on collision with the peasantry.
Will Stalin perhaps be able to lean on the proletariat? It is noteworthy that in recent days there has been no mention in the official press of the stringent labor laws passed last December. The Pravda no longer speaks of the heed of enforcing them in order to bolster up industrial production, as was the case a few months ago. Early this year, the lag in production was explained above all by the laxity of factory managements in enforcing these laws.
Not that production has improved. Just the contrary. If in 1938 the output lagged some 33% behind the plan as compared with 1937, the production for the first 8 months in the current year has lagged almost as much behind the plan.
The failure to accomplish the plan for 1939 is openly admitted. One week prior to the convocation of the Supreme Council, on August 22nd, Pravda stated editorially:
“Despite the colossal assistance rendered by the party and the Government to the All-Union coal-bin – the Donbas – and other coal regions, they still function unsatisfactorily; the metallurgists fail systematically (sic) to fulfill the plan and in the oilfields the tempos of oil production have been lowered.”
Such is the condition in coal, oil and metal – the key industries!
Yet faced with this critical situation, the bureaucracy for the time being does not dare to apply the measures which were enacted only a few months ago and which were designed to overcome this very situation. Instead they have resurrected the old slogan of “Socialist Competition,” which is being supplemented by feeble attempts to revive the ballyhoo about Stakhanovism. Failure to produce is nowadays being explained as due to the failure of the management to introduce Stakhanovist methods in the plants, plants, mills and mines. This change of tone can be due only to sharp resistance by the workers to the labor laws and their enforcement. These laws have not stopped the enormous turnover of labor.
The People’s Commissar of Heavy Machine Industry admitted that his particular branch was practically crippled by this turnover.
“From January to May of the current year,” states Commissar Malyshev, “the enterprises in our commissariat lost more than 3,000 workers a month.” (Izvestya, August 24)
 
War Increases Conflict in Industry
The army mobilization is not going to improve the conditions in labor supply. Furthermore, the few production indices that are still made public show that a sharp decline is again beginning to evince itself in industry. Now that the war has added its gigantic link to the developments and placed an ever-increasing burden on the country’s productive machinery, the crisis in industry can only be aggravated.
If today the output in coal and oil is dropping, how will Stalin be able to supply Hitler with these items? He can do so only to the further damage of internal economic life.
Finally, the transport system, which collapsed so catastrophically last winter, is giving signs that it is about to fold up again. The railroads will hardly bear up under the additional demands of troop movements, army supplies, traffic to Germany, etc. Waterway transport, especially sea routes, have become indispensable to Stalin above all to meet his obligations to Hitler. The Baltic is the one avenue still open. Thus the fate of Esthonia and other border countries with outlets to the Baltic becomes bound up with the inextricable web of the bureaucracy’s difficulties. An assault upon Estonia is indicated by the traffic emergency.
It may well be asked: How much of a load can Stalin place on the shoulders of the Russian masses in order to fulfill his pledges to his latest imperialist ally, Nazi Germany?
At the very outbreak of the war, the Stalin regime finds itself in a blind alley. From every standpoint it is the weakest and most unstable regime in the world today.
 



INEXTRICABLY LINKED with and running parallel to Stalin’s perfidies and frame-ups in politics are his convulsions and falsifications in the sphere of economic life.
In politics and in economy, these falsifications have swelled to unprecedented proportions since 1935. A stage was finally reached, some 18 months ago [1], when even falsified figures became a source of danger to Stalin. So, with the termination of the Second Five Year Plan, publication of official data relating to progress in industry practically ceased.
This silence was finally broken with the long-belated announcement of the inception of the Third Five Year Plan. But only a trickle of figures seeped through. Five days after the signing of the Stalin-Hitler Pact, on August 28, 1939, Pravda suddenly took the plunge. It published the purported balance-sheet of the First and Second Five Year Plans in the light of the newly-resumed Third Five Year Plan. The material covers a full page and is entitled:
FIGURES OF THE GREAT TRIUMPHS OF SOCIALISM
Material for Agitators and Propagandists
Falsified? The crudest job yet! But to falsify now is to embellish the most recent developments. Therefore they have to minimize the past achievements, and thus bring their statistics closer to reality. As a result, there is a glaring discrepancy between the past and most recent falsifications. In the light of this discrepancy the actual state of affairs becomes revealed. In fact Pravda’s blob of statistics serves to reveal Stalinism for what it is: A REGIME OF CRISIS, which is exhausting all its remaining possibilities at an ever increasing pace; sapping, first and foremost, its most substantial prop, that is, constantly and rapidly expanding production.
Below we print a table which was compiled solely on the basis of Pravda’s August 28 issue. Contained in this table are four related and vitally important items which cover the year 1913 – Czarist Russia on the eve of the first World War; the year 1929 – crucial year of the First Five Year Plan; the year 1933 – the “turn” in the Second Five Year Plan; and, lastly, 1938 – Stalin’s “threshold to Communism.” These are Pravda’s figures for the national income, the annual wage fund, the average annual wage, and, finally, the total labor force in those key years.
The symptomatic importance of these figures is self-evident. The size of the national income provides a well-nigh infallible index of the condition of the productive forces in a country. A rise in national income signifies the expansion of production. The rate of its annual increase or decrease is intimately related to the rate at which productive forces expand or contract. Similarly, the nation’s labor force contracts or expands, as a rule, with the fall or rise of national income. For precise analytical study, the basis on which national income is calculated must be known. That, however, remains Stalin’s private secret. Pravda assures us that the basis for all figures is the same. We can only pass on this assurance for what it is worth. Now let us turn to the table itself:



 


1913


1929


1933


1938




1.


National Income (in billions of rubles)


21.0


  28.9%     


     48.5%  


   105.0% [2]




2.


Annual Wage Fund (in billions of rubles)


not given


  97.0%     


     34.95%


     96.4%     




3.


Average Annual Wage (in rubles)


not given


800


1,566


3,467    




4.


Number of Workers and Employees (in millions)


11.4


  12.2       


     22.3    


     27.8       




5.


Percentage of Population Classified as Workers
 and Employees


not given


  17.3% [3]


not given


     34.7%     



The figures for national income show a swift rise in economy, from 28.9 billion in 1929 to 48.5 billion in 1933, and then a dizzy leap to the “estimated” sum of 105 billion for 1938. On the basis of these figures, we can now compute the average rate of expansion for each of the above periods. As compared with 1913, Soviet income (and economy) expanded at the rate of 1.37 times a year at the beginning of the First Five Year Plan; between 1929 and 1933 – the duration of the first plan – the rate of expansion rose to 1.67 times; that is, at the end of the first planned period it was almost double that of 1929; and in 1938, the claimed rate is 2.2 times, i.e., considerably more than double that of the previous period.
Now let us compare this set of figures with another set; the corresponding data for the expansion of the labor force. If in 1913 there were 11.4 million persons listed in this category, in 1929 we find 12.2 million. Therefore, the rate of increase was 1.07. In 1933 this rate rises to 1.9 (22.3 million as against 12.2 million), i.e., practically double. Finally, in 1938 Stalin’s figures report that the rate of increase had dropped to 1.3 as compared with the previous period (27.8 million as against 22.3 million), i.e., only one-third the previous growth. A corresponding table reads as follows:



 


1913–29


1929–33


1933–38




Rate of Expansion of National Income


1.37


1.67


2.2




Rate of Expansion of Labor Force


1.07


1.9  


1.3



These figures translated into the language of economic development show (1) a sharply rising curve of production which is, (2) accompanied by an almost identical rising curve in the growth of the labor force for the period of the First and Second Five Year Plans. With the rise in production there occurs an increase in the industrial army. But then we are suddenly confronted with a sharp break. The two processes fork in opposite directions. With the beginning of the Third Five Year Plan the production-curve soars upwards, while the labor-curve dips downward. We must pause.
Not that the phenomenon of expanding production in the face of a stationary or even declining labor force is an inexplicable phenomenon. Just the contrary. In advanced capitalist countries it has become a commonplace, acquiring a chronic character, and tending constantly to increase the army of unemployed. But then capitalism is decaying. Furthermore under capitalism, planned economy with a view to dynamic expansion is impossible; there is no prospect of opening up thousands of new factories, mills and mines, or developing new branches of industry that can be and are scheduled under a unified plan. With the Soviet Union the case is otherwise. Moreover, the Soviet Union has far from attained the mechanization of advanced capitalist countries, to say nothing of per capita production, or the degree of labor productivity, which, by admission of the regime itself, is far below that of corresponding industries in capitalist countries. Far from having reached a peak or saturation in her labor force, the Soviet Union suffers from an acute shortage of labor. In fact, this is cited repeatedly in the official press as one of the main reasons for failure to fulfill plan-quotas. Why then the retarded growth of labor forces? Is it perhaps because the peasants prefer to stay on the land? Or is it because any further increase (on paper) would cut down the “average annual wage,” and so had to be scaled down? Whatever the multiplicity of reasons may be, the fact is that we have a falsification here which admits this retardation and which tries to cover it up by puffing up the national income, and the annual wage fund.
From this admission we may justifiably conclude that the retarded growth of the labor army can only be a reflection of the retarded growth of national economy as a whole in the last few years. It is no longer expanding at the previous rate (1.67) but has instead declined. The actual rate of expansion of the national income is in all probability far closer to the reduced rate of the expansion of the labor force, i.e., 1.3 than it is to 2.2, the rate claimed by Stalin. This means that after years of rapid rise, economic development as a whole is slowing down. Production is beginning to stagnate around levels already achieved. Development in new fields does not compensate for the lag in the old. We refrain from adducing supplementary data that bear this contention out. We are willing to rest our case on Stalin’s own admission that the possibilities for further economic expansion under his regime are tending towards zero.
Let us scrutinize the Stalinist statistics more closely.
From 1929 to 1933 production almost doubles, and with it we have a doubling of the labor force. To be sure, the labor army expands at a swifter tempo than production (1.9 as against 1.67). But the discrepancy between these two rates – which, by the way, reflect much more truly the actual processes in Soviet economy – can readily be accounted for by the interplay of two factors: Low productivity of labor, on the one hand, and the swelling of the ranks of “employees,” i.e., the bureaucratic staff, on the other. Assuredly, not an ideal picture, but nevertheless one of remarkable progress. We shall presently return to the full implications of this historically unprecedented economic rise.
Meanwhile, let us compare the figures for 1929 with those chosen for the year 1913 by the bureaucracy itself. It is hard to believe one’s own eyes! These figures are nothing short of an official admission that in 1929 – the year of the “Entry Into Socialism”! – the levels attained barely surpassed those of Czarist Russia. The national income of 28.9 billion is matched against 21 Million under Czardom. The totals given for the respective labor forces approximate each other even more closely – 12.2 million as against 11.4 million. It is as if Stalin wished not only to confirm this fact known for a long time but to insist on it.
Now Russia under the Czars did not have 11.4 million industrial workers, not even half that number. Stalin’s statisticians must have therefore included also the Czarist “employees.” Did they compensate for this by adding Stalin’s chinovniks in the number of “workers and employees” for 1929 and thereafter? They undoubtedly did.
The average annual wage under Czardom is not given. Neither is the annual wage fund. These omissions are more eloquent even than the “falsifications by commission.” The reticences of the Kremlin do actually speak volumes. In this case, the explanation stares one in the face in the column for data on the “annual average wage,” where we find 800 rubles as the “average” wage for 1929.
This average, like all similar averages under this head, is arrived at very simply: Stalin divides the total wage fund (in this case 9.7 billion) by the total number of “workers and employees” (12.2 million) and puts down the quotient in round figures as 800. But as we already know, included in the total of “workers and employees” are an impressive number of bureaucrats from the party-union-administrative tops down to the skilled tiers of workers, who received far above the average wage. How many?
The precise number cannot be estimated. This, too, is Stalin’s secret. But if we assume that the productivity of a worker in 1929 approximated the levels of 1913, then we may draw the conclusion that Stalin’s hordes of bureaucrats must have at least approximated in number those of the Czar’s regime, of whom there were between 4-5 million in 1913, or about 40% of the total “workers and employees.” The figure must be fixed at even a larger proportion, if we take into account the progress in technology from 1913-1929, etc. But even if this estimate is cut by one-half it would still reduce the average wage of the mass of Soviet workers, especially the unskilled, not only below 70 rubles a month but actually below the living standards under Czarism. Thus, we have here an official acknowledgment by Stalin that in attaining and exceeding Czarist productive levels, his regime devoured and wasted a greater share of the national income than did the Czarist vampires. Thus social parasitism may attain proportions exceeding those of social exploitation – and this in the performance of a progressive task!
A profound lesson in the contradictory march of history, that is, in dialectics.
But the matter is far from exhausted. In point of fact, the year 1929 was one of the GOOD years under Stalinism for the workers, not to mention the peasants. The calculation in “rubles” for that particular year and period given in Pravda is in itself a flagrant fraud, intended primarily to cover up the terrible years, 1930–1931–1932. Those were the years of “socialist” inflation, when the currency was boosted from 2.0 billion in 1929 to 8.4 billion at the beginning of 1933 (when a reverse policy was adopted). Trotsky pointed out: “It is needless to say that inflation meant a dreadful tax upon the toiling masses ... In the sphere of agriculture inflation brought no less heavy consequences.” In terms of human suffering and sacrifice, in terms of havoc in agriculture, the decimation of livestock, the regime of famine, the millions of lives lost (the peasantry), the debit side of the bureaucratic ledger is matched only by the depredations of Asiatic conquerors. How then was the bureaucracy able to maintain itself?
Here we return to the rise in economy recorded during this period. Throughout these years production continued to expand.
To dilettantes and superficial observers of history, on the one hand, and to Stalin and all his flunkies, on the other, it appears as if the regime was able to preserve itself solely through the application of cunning maneuvers, terror, etc., etc. Violence alone did not, will not, and cannot save Stalin.
If the bureaucracy was able to maintain itself, it was because the October revolution had lodged at the foundation of the Soviet Union such colossal and progressive dynamic forces, and had extended such huge historical credits that not even Stalin and his regime were able to exhaust them in the span of more than 15 years.
From the end of 1932, on the basis of rapidly expanding production – unprecedented in history – came a gradual but unmistakable improvement in the living conditions of the masses. Just as in 1923, so also in this period and thereafter, the bureaucracy was able to stabilize itself on the basis of this rapid economic upswing. It was this factor that enabled the Bonapartist regime to intrench itself and to survive in the period of the first two plans. This and this alone saved Stalin in the terrible years from 1930–1932 when the masses sank to the lowest levels after the Civil War. This and this alone has enabled him to survive to the present time.
The purges, the application of terror in ever increasing doses served only as preventive, that is, supplementary measures.
The economic rise took place – despite the bureaucracy – on the basis of nationalized economy and the introduction (belated) of planning. Despite its monstrous waste and misdirection, despite its parasitic social nature, the Stalin regime was able to play a progressive role in the past because its rule straddled this foundation. Stalinism wrote those pages in blood and infamy. However, the successes achieved by planned economy were little short of staggering.
These successes appeared on the surface to stabilize the regime and render it impregnable. In reality, they were undermining it. The maintenance and extension of Bonapartist rule and privileges came into an irreconcilable conflict, which grew in intensity with the further development of the country’s productive forces.
The dynamic development of productive forces could be laced into the straitjacket of Stalinist Bonapartism only temporarily, and only after wild convulsions, each more violent than the preceding. These disturbances in the foundation, which are harbingers of a catastrophic eruption, found their reflection in convulsions in the political superstructure, each more bestial and unrestrained than the one before.
If Stalin falsifies statistics of Soviet economy, it is to hide this irreconcilable conflict between advancing economy and the fetters of his regime. If Stalin staged frame-ups and unleashed his terror in the period from 1935–1938, it was primarily to compensate for the declining rate of economic expansion, which spells his doom. The rising intensity of oppression in the political superstructure is a refracted and an inverse index of the economic downswing in the foundation.
The primary cause of this decline is the bureaucracy itself. Once again, the falsified statistics bear this out to the hilt.
Pravda boastfully cites the increases in the average annual wage to show that the living conditions of the masses have steadily improved since 1929. True enough, there has been an improvement, not since 1929, but since 1933. The peasantry gained much more from it than have the workers. The war has now introduced its own unknown quantities into that equation also. While we cannot specify any of them in advance, the general direction in which they will act can nevertheless be posited. War will worsen the economic position of the masses in the Soviet Union as elsewhere in the world. With this difference, however, that the Stalin regime will not dare in the interests of its own self-preservation to surrender even under duress of war an iota of its privileges. The slightest breach in the Bonapartist dam carries with it the threat of a deluge. Meanwhile, the encroachments of Stalinism have already become incompatible with a further strain on economy. Precisely in this sphere of encroachments, Stalin’s latest statistics provide the clearest indication to date, not of an improvement in the living standards of the masses, but rather of his regime’s “share” in the national income.
Given the annual national income, and the annual national wage, it is a simple matter to compute the percentage accruing to “workers and employes.” From this, it is possible to deduce indirectly and approximately the portion devoured annually by the Bonapartist camp-followers.
Taking the Pravda’s figures, we obtain the following results:

In 1929, 17.3% of the population received 34% of the national income.
 
In 1933, an unspecified percent received 72%.
 
In 1938, 34.7% of the population (27.8 million) received 96.4 billion or 91.8% of the national income (105 billion).

The first and obvious correction that must be introduced in the foregoing figures is a change in the percentage of the population. 27.8 million “workers and employees” do not constitute 34.7% of Russia’s population, estimated at 160–170 million. The Stalinists have merely doubled the actual percentage in each instance. Apparently, with the irrevocable triumph of socialism, it is impermissible for workers to number less than 30% of the population.
Moreover, the figures presented for the wage fund for 1938 are highly exaggerated. Merely juxtaposing the sum given for the annual wage for 1938 – 96.4 billion – with the claimed national income of 105 billion suffices to expose the fraud. This leaves a spread of less than 9 billion rubles between the amount paid out in wages and salaries and the total national income. As we have already stated, the Stalinist falsification serves only all the more glaringly to reveal the truth. Let us take these figures as Stalin manufactures them, and introduce only the obvious elementary correction in division. Our corrected table now reads:

In 1929 8.7% of the population received 34.0% of the national income
 
In 1933 14–15.0% of the population received 72.0% of the national income
 
In 1938 17.4% of the population received 91.8% of the national income

The above figures contain an admission that a small minority of the country (1/6th and even less) absorbs one-third, two-thirds, and even more than nine-tenths (!) of the national income.
Thus, the figures for the annual wage fund in reality provide a gauge for measuring the rapacious “legal” encroachments of the bureaucracy. The total amount they actually devour is immaterial. For here we have a relative gauge. If for example we assume that they appropriate one-half of the wage fund, then they devoured one-sixth of the national income in 1929, one-third in 1933, and almost one-half in 1938. They may have grabbed more, or maybe less, but whatever the actual total is, the ratio between the different sums remains the same. That is to say, on the basis of the above estimate the bureaucracy devoured at least twice as much during the Second Five Year Plan as they did during the first. And their “plan” for the Third Five Year tenure is still more ambitious.
National economy cannot withstand this drain, especially under war-time conditions.
To recapitulate: the statistics are false, but the falsifications have a basis in fact, and so the truth is refracted through them, warped but unmistakable. Even prior to the outbreak of war, Stalinism was nearing the end of its historical tether. It is rapidly exhausting all its “credits.” Further expansion of the productive forces is becoming more and more incompatible with the further existence of the regime. Stalinism will be sent to its grave by the greatest productive force of the Soviet Union – her working class. Stalin’s statistics chart his own death agony.
 
Footnotes
1. This article was written Sept. 10, 1939, for The New International. It is published here for the first time. – Ed.
2. Official Stalinist estimate.
3. 1928 figure given.



In January 1935, Leon Trotsky, analyzing the degeneration of the Stalin regime, wrote:
“A diplomatic retreat before the world bourgeoisie and before reformism; an economic retreat before the petty bourgeois tendencies within the country; a political offensive against the proletarian vanguard – this is the three-fold formula of the new chapter in the development of Stalinist Bonapartism.”
This chapter, approximately from 1934 to August 1939, has come to a close, punctuated, so to speak, by the outbreak of war, which in its turn opens anew page not only in the degeneration of Stalinism but in the history of mankind.
In the light of the foregoing formula, I propose to draw a preliminary balance sheet.
 
Purges Cripple Economic Life
Little need be said of the Stalinist offensive against the proletarian vanguard, which unfolded in this period in a series of persecutions, frame-ups, and murders unmatched in the annals of history. The facts are still fresh in the minds of all. With the turn in diplomacy, the bureaucratic terror was immediately intensified. After the assassination of Kirov, the terror was unleashed, culminating in the Moscow Trials, the massacre of the generations of October at home, and assassinations abroad (murder of Ignace Reiss, Leon Sedov, R. Klement, thousands of militants in Spain,etc.)
Purge upon purge followed which beheaded the Red Army, and crippled every sphere of Soviet social, political and economic life. Those executed numbered tens of thousands; those jailed, hundreds of thousands, while not less than four million were herded into GPU barracks and concentration camps. Far from insuring the regime at home, this purge only added so much tinder for the explosive forces that have accumulated under the leaden lid of Bonapartist oppression.
On the world arena, Stalin’s retreat led swiftly to a capitulation to the fascist wing of the world bourgeoisie (the Stalin-Hitler Alliance). It was preceded by a capitulation to the“democratic” wing of imperialism (the Franco-Soviet Pact, the Stalin-Laval Communiqué, the entry into the League of Nations, the defense of the Versailles Treaty, the policy of the People’s Fronts).
Thus, in a strictly limited sense, it may be said that in the political sphere Stalin was able to draw his work to a conclusion.
 
The Course of Economic Retreat
But the economic retreat at home has far from followed this rectilinear course. If the capitulation to the democratic wing of the world bourgeoisie was accompanied internally by the return to the market, the introduction of Stakhanovism (1935), the New Constitution (1936), concessions to the peasantry (the right to trade, privately cultivated “farm” strips, ownership of land in perpetuity, mild tax laws, etc.), and rigid legislation against labor (December 1938) – that is, if Stalin retreated hitherto before the petty bourgeois tendencies within the country, then the immediate effect of the Stalin-Hitler pact has been to halt this retreat.
In a preceding article, the main features of this new development were outlined. With the belated arrival of Moscow papers to this country, additional data is now available on the economic blind-alley of the Stalin regime, and the mechanics whereby it seeks to overcome its newest crisis. The full text of the new agricultural law is not yet available – if it ever will be! – neither are any reports of the “discussion” that took place at the sessions of the Supreme Council. But we do have now the text of the report delivered by A.G. Zverev, People’s Commissar of Finance, on this law.
The report is very brief, and sets a new mark for evasiveness. Only from the Pravda editorial do we glean the fact that the tax “for privately run enterprises amounts to 11–25% of their income”. (Pravda, August 29)
Zverev’s report, which carefully circumnavigates this aspect of the new legislation, nevertheless clearly indicates that the actual tax is higher by as much as one-third. The corresponding passage from Zverev’s report touching on this point reads as follows:
“I shall not go into detail on all these norms, but I must say that this question – the question of fixing the norms on various staple crops demands exceptional attention and commensurate discussion on the part of the Deputies of the Supreme Council of the USSR ... The law gives the People’s Commissariats of the Federated Republics the right to fix different norms of (calculating) revenue in various branches of agriculture and various forms of staple crops with a view to in-creasing or lowering the norms envisaged by the law – up to30% of these norms.”
There is internal evidence that the formula “increasing or lowering” is purely rhetorical. The stress is on the increase. This is proved, among other things, by the extremely brief interval set for the collection of the tax, which immediately goes into effect.
 
Bureaucracy Exempt from Taxation
The deadline set for the payment of the new tax is: October 1, November 1, and December l, that is to say, from 60 to 90 days, and even less. On this point Zverev is categoric. He said:
“The People’s Commissariats of the Federated Republics have the right to speed up the time set for collection of payments ... but by not more than one month.” (Pravda, August 29).
Furthermore, the law provides for the taxation not only of well-to-do peasants but even “the income of (agricultural) laborers and employees” hitherto exempt.
What social prop has the regime to lean upon against the inevitable reaction of the peasantry? The answer is supplied by the exemption clauses in the law. Apart from the aged, the only ones exempt are, and we cite Zverev verbatim:
“Not subject to the agricultural tax are teachers and agronomists, zootechnicians, veterinarians, doctors and barber-surgeons, fertilizer specialists and agricultural technicians, engineers, chief mechanics, directors of the Mechanical Tractor Stations, directors of mechanical tractor shops and directors of Sovkhozes; together with the leading personnel of the district – to the number of not more than 30 persons to a district ...” (idem)
In other words, Zverev merely lists the recently constituted bureaucracy, in the rural areas. Such is the composition of the new tops in Soviet Society. It may not be superfluous to quote from a report from Kiev (the country’s granary) which casts further light on the leading role of the new aristocracy. In the report, which details the progress of preparations for the coming elections to the local Soviets), it is stated:
“Great activity was evidenced in the regional conference of agitators, at which about 600 were present – teachers, agronomists, doctors, the leading personnel of the collectives.” (Pravda, August 27)
A stratum of the population that has its roots deep in the petty bourgeoisie is the sole remaining prop of the regime!
 
A Clue to the Bureaucracy’s Size
How reliable is this layer? It has all the vices of the classic petty bourgeoisie and none of its virtues, especially in terms of training, efficiency and loyalty to the ruling regime that characterizes the petty bourgeoisie in capitalist countries. In subservience alone do Stalin’s petty bourgeois cohorts match their prototypes elsewhere.
The numerical strength of the bureaucracy has been one of the most jealously guarded secrets of the regime. But the official press now supplies us with a clue even in this sphere. In an editorial devoted to the preparations for the coming elections to the local Soviets, Pravda for August 27 states the following:
“1,300,000 Deputies will be elected to the local Soviets of toilers’ deputies ... Millions of toilers in the city and country have been drawn into the preparations for the elections to the local Soviets. Suffice it to adduce a single fact: According to factual reports, in the whole of the USSR there will be approximately 7 million people involved in (the work of) the electoral commissions.”
The regime boasts of a supporting army of 7 million. Perhaps that is not exaggerated. One thing is certain, while the bulk of the Deputies (1,300,000) will be composed of “teachers, agronomists, doctors, etc., etc.”, the majority of the 7 million must fall into a somewhat different category. The lower tiers of this young bureaucratic army have their roots in and are subject to the pressure of the working class on the one hand and the peasantry on the other.
The actual course of the struggle alone will determine which of these two camps will prevail. An important indication of the actual trends in these two camps, as well as their relative strength, will perhaps be demonstrated in the very next days ahead, specifically, in the elections to the local Soviets which will coincide with the deadline for tax collections.
 



II
Since September 11, one week prior to the issuance of orders to the Red Army to march into Poland, the official Moscow press has ceased publishing all data relating to the daily production in key industries: iron, steel, rolled steel, freight car loadings, and the automotive industry. Never before has the publication of these figures been suspended for so long a period. No official information whatsoever is now available relating to the progress of the Third Five Year Plan inasmuch as the publication of all other data was suspended early in 1938. The only possible interpretation for this veil of secrecy is that production is on the verge of breakdown, if it has not already collapsed.
The figures previously published – for August and the first week in September – unmistakably denoted a decline in production, in some instances below 1936 levels. The decline since then has apparently assumed catastrophic proportions.
 
Labor Shortage Deepens Crisis
One of the primary reasons for the current crisis, as the Socialist Appeal has already reported, is an acute shortage of labor, accompanied by enormous labor turnover and aggravated by the mobilization of the army which has made further inroads into the already inadequate labor force.
The situation is so grave that the official press has carried unequivocal confirmation of it.
The crisis in oil production is depicted in great detail in Pravda for September 8, where we find the following significant statement:
“In Azneft (one of Baku’s biggest oil fields – JGW) the labor turnover has been enormous. In the past seven months the trusts have hired 12,960 workers but have dismissed 14,144. Among those who leave are not infrequently members of the engineering and technical staff. The turnover is to a large measure due to the impossibility of providing living quarters for all.”
V. Malyshev, People’s Commissar of Heavy Machine Building, is also quite outspoken about the crisis in his department. He writes:
“At the present time only 84% of the workers scheduled by the plan are working in the enterprises of our Commissariat, 10% less than the total employed in the same period last year. Yet our program has grown 20% as compared with last year.” (Pravda, September 16)
 
Huge Turnover in Labor Criticized
Eloquent as these admissions are, they pale in comparison with a statement printed in Pravda in connection with a review of a book just issued by the Institute of Economics and entitled: Labor in Socialist Society. In a review of this book, the author is criticized sharply for slurring over “self-criticism and analysis of the shortcomings in the organization of labor in recent years.”
“The causes of these shortcomings,” thunders the reviewer, “are reduced by the author almost exclusively to the consequences of the wrecking activities of Trotskyist-Bukharinite and other agents of capitalism ... But it is a mistake to reduce all our failings and lapses solely to wrecking. For instance, on the very important question of the labor turnover, the author gives a very detailed and interesting analysis of the causes of turnover in the period of intervention and civil war. But in illuminating this very same question for the recent years, he confines himself to data relating to a decline in labor turnover which began in 1932. Meanwhile, in 1938 and 1939 we have witnessed a considerable increase of labor turnover in a number of the most important branches of industry, especially in coal mining, iron ore production, heavy metallurgy, etc. Furthermore,this turnover has been one of the vital reasons for the failure of these branches of industry to fulfill the plans. The labor turnover is due primarily to shortcomings in the organization of labor and of wages, lack of attention to new workers, lag in light mechanization and so on.” (Pravda, September 14)
In the recent weeks the press has carried a great deal of this hypocritical indignation over the “shortcomings in the organization of labor and wages” and the living conditions of workers. But to remedy this, the bureaucrats must clamp down on their own privileges. And since this is out of the question they have sought to solve the crisis by intensifying the speed up. Since June, the workers have been forced to run two, ten, and as many as 30 lathes in the machine shops. (Pravda, September 15) All this under the slogan of “Extend Stakhanovism!” Stakhanov, together with other figureheads, has toured the USSR in a rabid campaign to put this speed up over. It has obviously failed. It has obviously met with resistance on the part of the workers.
 
Living Conditions Becoming Worse
Instead of improving, the living conditions of the workers are worsening. While food shortages are being vigorously deified as “slanders,” the papers carry reports of trials of speculators, food hoarders and“disorganizes of trade.” All such cases must be investigated and brought to trial within three days. (Pravda, September 14) In his “historic” radio speech announcing the invasion of Poland, Molotov was compelled to devote time to warn against speculation and to reassure the populace that there was no shortage of necessities and that rationing was not being envisaged.
Since the invasion of Poland,the press has carried only triumphant and patriotic articles, and glowing accounts of mass meetings in factories where resolutions are passed acclaiming the progress of the Red Army and pledging new records in production.
But the admissions as well as the even more eloquent reticences of the official press bespeak a situation that is diametrically opposite to the one Stalin seeks to depict. In our opinion it is by no means excluded that strikes are once again taking place in factories. The last time there were strikes was early in January, immediately after the passage of the Draconic labor laws, the primary intent of which was precisely to halt the labor turnover. In January, too Pravda ceased for a few days to publish the key data for production. Stalin’s latest “victories” are proving to be the most disastrous for his regime.
 



Moscow’s official orders to purge the party again are contained in an editorial of Pravda for September 12, which announces the sudden decision of the Central Committee to hold “in the period between September 15 to October 15 the regular elections for the party organs in all the primary regional and city party organizations.” Three days’ notice!
Pravda admits that the last elections to these “lower” bodies took place more than a year ago, whereas according to the recently adopted party statutes these elections are supposed to occur annually, why then the emergency decision of the Central Committee? Stalin promised at the Eighteenth Party Congress, held only six months ago, that no more widescale purges would be perpetrated. The elections scheduled at short notice are obviously connected with (1) the mobilization orders to the army; (2) the invasion of Poland; (3) the new drive against the peasants, that is, enforced grain collections; (4) the impending elections to the local Soviets; and last but not least (5) the developing crisis in economy. Stalin is preparing for the latest emergency.
The only passage from the Central Committee directives relating to the new elections printed by Pravda in bold type is as follows:
“THE PARAMOUNT TASK OF ALL THE PARTY ORGANIZATIONS IN THE COMING ELECTIONS IS TO ASSURE THE ELECTION TO THE LEADING PARTY ORGANS OF THOROUGHLY TESTED BOLSHEVIKS WHO ARE BOUNDLESSLY LOYAL TO OUR PARTY AND CAPABLE OF DEFENDING THE CAUSE OF THE COMMUNIST PARTY TO THEIR LAST BREATH.”
Then follows this significant passage:
“During the last year hundreds of thousands of candidates have been accepted as members of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union; hundreds of thousands of eminent people have joined the ranks of the party.”
It is from the ranks of these new “hundreds of thousands” that new leaders are to be elected. Pravda makes no bones about it, citing Stalin’s directives to the Eighteenth Party Congress in relation to the “advancement of new cadres,” the editorial states categorically:
 
Friction on Top
“Comrade Stalin’s directive must be realized in the coming elections; it must be taken as the starting point for advancing candidates to the party bureaus, regional and city party committees.”
Apparently there is friction among the tops. For there is a veiled warning contained in the editorial which “reminds” that the elections to the “upper” bodies will take place in six months, in accordance with the statutes.
The assumed calmness of the official press is a clear token of the tenseness of the situation. But every action taken denotes that a storm is brewing; and the “Helmsman” is again clearing the decks!
 

