cher’s Trotsky by James D. Young 1964


James D Young 1963
The Two Faces of Socialism
Source: Socialist Commentary, October 1963. Scanned and prepared for the Marxist Internet Archive by Paul Flewers.
Modern socialism was born in the cradle of early nineteenth-century Europe, under the harsh and brutalising conditions of nascent industrialism, when ‘kings crept out again to feel the sun’. Socialist ideas and concepts of creating a ‘new society’ were therefore shaped and sometimes marred by the conditions that gave birth to them. Just as the rulers of a rapidly vanishing feudal Europe pushed the demands for universal suffrage and popular education into the background, so, in turn, did certain socialist thinkers and philosophers conceive of the idea of imposing socialism on society from above.
But side by side with the development of authoritarian socialism there grew up a conception and tradition of socialism which was democratic and humanistic. The quintessence of this latter conception of socialism was tersely expressed by the English socialist, William Morris, when he said that ‘fellowship is life, and the lack of fellowship is death’. To realise and do justice to the ideals of democratic socialism means that we have constantly to expose and repudiate the tyrannical, life-denying foibles of the heirs of the authoritarian and totalitarian strand of thought in the socialist tradition.
In times gone by and now beyond recall, when socialism was primarily a commitment to values and a firm determination to eradicate unnecessary social and economic problems, Eugene Victor Debs, the American socialist, wrote: 
Years ago I recognised my kinship with all living things, and I said then, and I say now, that while there is a lower class, I am of it; while there is a criminal element, I am of it; while there is a free soul in prison, I am not free.
Meanwhile, in spite of the New Left’s babble about ‘commitment’ and ‘socialist humanism’, one could go through the literature, both imaginative and sociological, of the present-day authoritarian socialist movement and search in vain for such an eloquent or comparable statement of a socialist’s commitment to humanity.
To illustrate and illuminate the contempt and disrespect with which most authoritarian socialists regard the individual (as distinct from ‘the class’, ‘the Party’ and ‘the collective’) it ought to be sufficient to quote what a Trotskyist said at a national conference of rank-and-file industrial workers a few years ago: ‘I am sick and tired of all this talk about conscience. Conscience is not a matter of individual responsibility; it is a class question.’ However, if one were to approach the sacred texts with the reverence, diligence and incantation properly reserved for historical documents, one could no doubt justify and back up this nonsense of ‘conscience being a class question’ by quoting Marx’s famous dictum ‘it is not what the individual as an individual does that is important, but what he does as the member of a class’. But what happens to ‘the man of conscience’ who, whether of working or middle-class origin, has to struggle against his own class to become a socialist, anyhow?
The age we live in is an age of inhumanity, double-think, bureaucracy and conformity. This is now so transparent that even those thinkers on the extreme left of the dominant political movements, who are still capable of thinking, albeit in an often schematic and fragmentary way, of the problems of socialism in ‘the terrible hell of the twentieth century’, sometimes quite abruptly give away their sense of disquiet and uneasiness by letting slip the occasional ‘deviationist’ remark. Thus a Polish ‘revisionist’ (engaged in sociological excavations to rediscover the ‘early Marx’) can digress from a fierce polemic with Stalinist philosophers to confess that ‘it is not the dogma he dislikes, but rather the representatives of the dogma’. [1] A strange dichotomy indeed.
Yet to engage in argument with the totalitarian or state socialist (the adjectives are interchangeable) on purely theoretical grounds about the inadequacies of traditional social theories and their irrelevance to present-day problems is often a fruitless and futile business. At the worst one is reduced to producing textual or documentary evidence to prove that Engels or Kautsky did not mean this or that, but something quite different; or at best to force the totalitarian socialist to acquiesce in admitting a criticism of a particular aspect of doctrinaire socialism only to end up being denounced as an ‘impressionist’  –  the cruellest thrust of all.
A Problem of Morality
The upshot of this is that authoritarian socialism has hardened and fossilised into an amalgam of bureaucratic manipulation and economic abstractions. The Conservatives have persistently attempted to confuse the authoritarian ‘image’ of socialism with the democratic one, and this may partly help to explain the resurgence of liberalism among white-collar workers. Consequently ‘impressionist’ criticism of ‘socialists’ and ‘socialism’ of the authoritarian and totalitarian variety is vitally necessary if socialism is to become once again widely recognised as a problem of morality, and not as a problem of pig iron production.
When the socialist movement was at its best, socialists were concerned with enlarging and developing the individuality and the potentiality of every human being. To capture political power in those times was not regarded as an end in itself, but rather as a means of freeing and emancipating human beings from the poverty, suffering and the oppressive circumstances dwarfing their lives. If any evidence is still required of the extent to which authoritarian and totalitarian socialism has risen above the mundane business of worrying over the needs of human beings, let me quote Hugh MacDiarmid, the Scottish communist poet: 
As I have said in one of my poems, I on the other hand would sacrifice a million people any day for one immortal lyric. I am a scientific socialist: I have no use whatever for emotional humanism. [2]
So, in the fullness of time, the elements of the ‘political realism’ and the ‘necessity of history’ expounded by Hugh MacDiarmid coalesce in totalitarian philosophy with the Messianism of the Old Testament prophets, and this too, though I suspect unconsciously, was given away by Sean O'Casey, the communist dramatist, in an interview with WJ Weatherby of The Guardian on 15 August 1962: ‘Do you think Marilyn Monroe would have died if we had had socialism? Who killed Marilyn Monroe?  –  that’s a question.’
When one looks behind the facile propaganda implicit in Sean O'Casey’s remark about Marilyn Monroe a real political dilemma can be detected. At a time when there is a marked absence of dramatic and exciting hunger marches, clashes between police and strikers, and the rest of it, and when physical struggles between fascists and ‘democrats’ are manufactured in Trafalgar Square or in the plays of ‘committed’ dramatists, how can recruits be won for left-wing political movements? In the case of the totalitarian socialist movement recruits can only be attracted by creating and perpetuating the double-edged myth of the utterly demonic, inhuman, all-oppressive and ruthless Western civilisation, and the humane, tolerant, freedom-loving and life-giving ‘Socialist third of the world’.
The Totalitarian Myth
Of course this would not, apart from the not unimportant difficulties involved in striving to relate democratic socialist values and principles to the colossal and unforeseen growth of modern technology, rate very high except as communist propaganda. But this particular aspect of communist propaganda contains the kernel of the religious appeal of totalitarian socialist philosophy, namely, the myth that personal and social unhappiness and conflict will be unheard of in a real socialist society. And it is at this point that Sean O'Casey’s apparent humanism dovetails with and complements Hugh MacDiarmid’s obvious and murderous anti-humanism.
By the way, that collective personage, the Hugh MacDiarmid – Sean O'Casey type, was humorously put paid to by a Scottish socialist who once retorted: ‘The trouble with the previous speaker is that he takes his economics from Jesus Christ and his morality from Karl Marx.’ But that anecdote belongs to the relatively quiet and peaceful years before the First World War when totalitarianism was hardly conceived of.
Then how is democratic socialism to make any real headway in the present situation? Firstly, by recognising that totalitarian socialism has, both organisationally and ideologically, permeated the labour movement on an unprecedented scale. And, secondly, by rejecting the totalitarian organic vision of socialism according to which an harmonious and wholesome society will eradicate all unhappiness and conflict as well as the notion that all conflict and unhappiness springs from capitalist society. 
We want [as Norman Mailer put it] a socialist world not because we have the conceit that men would therefore be happy... but because we feel the moral imperative in life itself to raise the human condition, even if this should ultimately mean no more than that man’s suffering has been lifted to a higher level.
But, in order to translate the basic democratic socialist values of freedom, equality and the brotherhood of man into terms of practical politics, we will require to break away from the practice of clinging to outmoded concepts and dogmas. This means, too, vigorously championing political demands that many socialists have hitherto regarded as marginal, for example, the campaigns against capital punishment, racial prejudice and discrimination, the exploitation by greedy landlords, and popularising the idea of associations for consumers’ and producers’ protection. Until fairly recently, in spite of the rise and ideological survival of Stalinism and Nazism, far too many socialists have underrated the importance of the right of habeas corpus, Parliamentary democracy, freedom of speech and freedom of assembly, and the brave and grand old liberals and socialists who went to jail and sometimes died for them. By defending their achievements we will be beginning to realise the dream of Bronterre O'Brien, the Chartist leader, who coined the phrase ‘social democracy’ by which he meant democratic participation as distinct from mere voting rights.
Notes
1. The Guardian, 23 June 1959  –  Author.
2. Essay in the Little Reviews Anthology, 1947  –  Author.
 


 James D. Young Archive




ydeside and Stalinist Historiography by James D Young 1996


James D Young 1996
Red Clydeside and Stalinist Historiography 
Source: Letter in Revolutionary History, Volume 6, no 1, 1996. Prepared for the Marxist Internet Archive by Paul Flewers.
At the ‘Scottish Dimensions’ conference in Oxford on 24-27 March 1995, I simply could not believe that Stalinism was still such a strong current in Britain. Organised by Ruskin College and the History Workshop Journal, the Oxford conference gave a platform to speakers from the now 57 varieties of the Stalinist left. Far from coming to this conference with a sense of shame and humility, I was appalled by the arrogance of Stalinist historians who ought to have admitted to their role in the multi-dimensional crisis of late twentieth-century socialism. I was just recovering from my experience of sharing a workshop with Willie Thompson on the themes of the history of Scottish radicalism and Scottish communism when I read his letter in Revolutionary History, Volume 5, no 3, in defence of the indefensible  –  The Good Old Cause. [1] Unlike what he says in his letter to you, he pleaded innocence of any knowledge of Comintern subsidies to the Communist Party of Great Britain (CPGB) until after his book was written. But he must have known about John Maclean’s accusation of the subsidies from Moscow at the very beginning of the party’s history in Britain.
It is evident that Thompson needs a few lessons on the real democratic role of leftist historians in contributing to labour and socialist history. In his excellent book My Reminiscences of the Russian Revolution (1920), M Philips Price wrote: ‘There are those today who say that education and historical research are one of the most powerful instruments of the ruling class to secure spiritual hegemony over the toiling masses.’ But although this remains true in 1995 in a context where establishment historians have spent the past two decades rubbishing ‘the Red Clyde’, Thompson engages in academic pedantry to rubbish Kenneth Newton’s book The Sociology of British Communism at the same time as he helps the ‘revisionist’ historians who are committed to writing the Red Clyde out of the pages of history.
Thus in Raphael Samuel’s edited collection of the conference papers entitled Scottish Dimensions, Thompson uses his paper ‘Scottish Communism’ to summarise some of the themes of his book The Good Old Cause. To score a cheap point against Newton, he says: ‘Certainly the experience of Red Clydeside (whether or not its status was legendary) contributed significantly to the party’s formation and to the temper it developed thereafter...’ By sleekitly formulating his attitude to Red Clydeside in this way, Thompson can keep himself out of trouble with the right-wing historians in the British universities.
The tragedy of his endeavour to produce a book on the history of British communism is that he seems incapable of writing critical history. Furthermore, he is less than competent in attempting to produce history for those young people who are trying to understand an apparently triumphant capitalism towards the end of the terrible hell of the twentieth century. Like so many of his spiritual brethren, he sees his mission in life as interpreting history (for whom, by the way, one may ask) rather than in trying to change the world. But Thompson’s ‘history’ will not do anymore; and one of the things that pleases me more than anything else is that critical, class struggle historians like me can now challenge Stalinist historians without really being accused of witch-hunting.
Making the point that Thompson in his capacity as an historian makes a virtue of ignorance, Al Richardson will perhaps be interested to know that he used the same technique whilst ‘debating’ against me in Oxford. But, although he responded to my critical questions about the history of the CPGB by accusing me of being ‘a professional heretic’, Thompson has not understood that some of us belong to a different cultural history summed up in the old Scottish saying ‘The truth against the world’. At Oxford Thompson justified his decision not to discuss individuals (including John Maclean, the famous Clydeside socialist), by asserting that history has always been made by ‘social forces’, not individuals. Hence, too, his omission of Joe Stalin from his paper on Scottish communism. However, with regard to the difference between the book and the paper, he contradicted himself by mentioning ‘the Trotskyist’ Lewis Grassic Gibbon. Discussing the CPGB’s ‘class against class’ policy in the late 1920s and early 1930s, he asserted that ‘an echo of this can be found in the third part of Lewis Grassic Gibbon’s A Scots Quair trilogy, Grey Granite’.
Therefore, when Thompson replies to Richardson’s review of The Good Old Cause, by defending his decision not to discuss ‘various individuals’ who ‘came up against the CPGB from a Trotskyist standpoint’, he must have known about what Hugh MacDiarmid called Gibbon’s ‘ineradicable Trotskyism’. Moreover, since he mentioned A Scots Quair in his Oxford paper, I'd like to know why he did not inform the young people in the large audience about Gibbon’s critique of Stalinism in the 1920s and 1930s.
In the light of the attention that contributors to Revolutionary History, New Politics, etc, have paid to Victor Serge, Thompson had an historian’s responsibility to discuss Scottish  –  and English  –  socialists and communists who challenged the moral corruption of the CPGB and its affiliates in other parts of the world. I suppose he threw in a brief reference to Gibbon to give his paper ‘colour'; or perhaps to show the human side of a ‘communist’ who is apparently not interested in individuals in history.
Though a man of the extreme left, Gibbon was never a Trotskyist. Objecting to the Stalinists’ role in creating moral corruption in the labour movement, he did so with the same concerns as Victor Serge and Ignazio Silone. Unlike Thompson, I have taught many courses in Scottish  –  and other  –  labour history classes, and unlike him I tried to identify the concrete moral corruption of ‘communists’ by quoting how an American Stalinist like Joseph Freeman rubbished classical Marxism by insisting: 
The unequal development of individuals has raised a Stalin, Dzerzhinsky, Chicherin or Bukharin to that leadership which every social group requires whenever such men show a greater capacity than the average for understanding and manipulating the mechanics of history. (Joseph Freeman, An American Testament (London, 1938), p 204)
Though Thompson is probably incapable of grasping this, Gibbon was not just objecting to the ‘class against class’ mystification. While he was not an orthodox Marxist, Gibbon was much closer to Marx than Thompson in his insistence that ‘history does nothing’. Moreover, when he used Grey Granite to dissect the bunkum about the CPGB’s manipulation of the world’s working folk as ‘history’s instruments’, he was dealing with the conflict over moral values between socialists and Stalinists, as well as the issue of the nature of the vanguard party as a party of a new type.
Although it has not been noticed by literary critics, Silone made similar anti-Stalinist criticisms in his novel The Seed Beneath the Snow. When two of the comrades in Silone’s novel about fascist Italy in the late 1930s discussed their shared experience inside the Communist Party of Italy, the ensuing dialogue took place: 
To tell the truth, they did not hold much with friendship in the party; there was something suspicious about it, as if it might engender the formation of cliques and gangs. For this reason I should even rightly admit that friendship, in the true and human meaning of the word, was regarded and despised as a remnant of bourgeois individualism... After a long silence Simone got up to make ready his bed, and murmured: ‘I didn’t know how widespread was the decay.’ (I Silone, The Seed Beneath the Snow (London, 1943), pp 251-52)
It is no longer possible to write a history of the CPGB without acknowledging the deep moral corruption  –  and the practical eradication of classical Marxism and socialist humanism  –  represented by Stalinism. By the time that Gibbon was writing his trilogy of fine novels A Scots Quair, there was already an implicit clash in the Western Stalinist organisations between classical socialist ideas and the brutal and forced industrialisation in a Russia without soviets.
Before the libertarian Bolshevik revolution of 1917, the classical socialist attitude towards the historical process was summed up by Antonio Labriola when he said: Labour, which is the prerequisite of all progress, has pressed the sufferings, the privations, the travail and the ills of the multitude into the service of the comfort of the few. History is like an inferno. It might be presented as a sombre drama entitled The Tragedy of Labour. (Socialism and Philosophy (Chicago, 1906), p 109)
Social forces have always been personified by individuals; and, despite Thompson’s Stalinism, socialists have not been sexless, ageless, nationless or classless. The real tragedy of Thompson’s ‘his-story’ is that he has not even attempted to explain why the CPGB became a powerful force hostile to and murderous in response to democratic, class struggle Socialism from below.
Thompson wants people to think that he is ‘humane’, but, quite apart from the truth of Dante’s observation that ‘the way to hell is paved with good intentions’, real humanity in the 1990s demands participation in the new world that is struggling to be born.
Notes
1. Al Richardson reviewed Willie Thompson’s The Good Old Cause: British Communism, 1920-1991 (London, 1992) in Revolutionary History, Volume 5, no 2 (1994), and an exchange between Willie Thompson and Al Richardson appeared in Revolutionary History, Volume 5, no 3 (1995)  –  MIA.
 


James D Young Archive




rxism and the British New Left by James D Young 1967


James D Young 1967
Neo-Marxism and the British New Left
Source: Survey, no 62, January 1967. Scanned and prepared for the Marxist Internet Archive by Paul Flewers.
The New Left grew out of the upheavals in British social and political life revolving round the Suez crisis, the Khrushchev revelations, the Hungarian revolution, the frustrations and alienation of ‘the scholarship boy’, and the preoccupations of socially-conscious intellectuals with the ‘pernicious influence’ of advertising and television. It was both a product of and a response to a mood of social discontent among a new generation of intellectuals, of university graduates and undergraduates in the 1950s. This mood was reflected in the universal enthusiasm with which Richard Hoggart’s book, The Uses of Literacy, was reviewed in 1957. By 1958 the political mood within the New Left had hardened, and the movement as a whole was committed to a form of neo-Marxist analysis of contemporary society. Thus EP Thompson confessed that:
I still prefer to call myself a dissident communist rather than a late convert to democratic socialism or any other hybrid. I think there is some point in some of us in the West asserting our communist origins, instead of hoping our traces will be covered by the dust of time; we may be ashamed of past gullibility, arguments and attitudes, but we need not be ashamed of our basic decision to stand on the side on which we did when faced with this historical dilemma. [1]
The Khrushchev ‘revelations’ at the twentieth congress of the CPSU was the key event triggering off the emergence and crystallisation of opposition within the British Communist Party. At that time a group of communist intellectuals published and circulated a duplicated bulletin, The Reasoner, in open defiance of the party bureaucrats in King Street; and, when the second wave of Russian tanks rolled into Budapest to crush the Hungarian workers’ rising, most of the opposition leaders within the party at once resigned. The immediate upshot of the resignation of EP Thompson and John Saville, who had roots in the industrial North of England, was the emergence of The New Reasoner  —  a printed ‘quarterly journal of socialist humanism’.
Side by side with this development a group of Labour and dissident communist undergraduates launched early in 1957 a new socialist journal, Universities and Left Review. Both journals were concerned with developing a socialist-humanist philosophy relevant to the times, related to what was happening in their own society and to the labour movement as a whole, and with the arts. The neo-Marxist tendency had now repudiated the concept of keeping ‘artists in uniform'; the ‘scholarship boys’ had opted out of the ‘culture of prosperity’ with its ‘bitter-sweet taste'; and they had all agreed that imaginative literature and socialist humanism were complementary. But while The New Reasoner concentrated on systematic attempts to rescue Marxism from the stifling, stultifying hand of Stalinist orthodoxy, Universities and Left Review turned its attention to sociological criticism, the cinema, literary criticism and community planning. Its pages were packed with articles and contributions from prominent novelists, artists and journalists; it attracted a large number of readers, carried regular articles and review notices on a wide range of problems worrying the whole spectrum of professional people from the school teacher to the film director; and it soon won favourable comment, high praise and enthusiastic recommendation in the glossy magazines and quality newspapers. On the other hand The New Reasoner had a much smaller circulation (estimated at about 2300 at its peak in 1959), reflecting the ‘harder’ political origins and commitment of its editors and supporters, and it therefore took a more serious and consistent interest in the goings-on of the trade unions and the Labour Party. Nonetheless there was considerable overlapping at times, as when, for example, Universities and Left Review published ‘The Insiders’, a study of ‘the men who rule British industry’ in 1957, in a determined effort to influence the Labour Party conference debate on public ownership. Conversely, The New Reasoner carried short stories by Doris Lessing, poems by Christopher Logue and Bertolt Brecht, and art supplements on the work of William Blake and Diego Rivera.
Yet The New Reasoner was the main pole of attraction for the dissident communists and the emergent non-party neo-Marxists (such as Peter Worsley) who were academics, scholars and specialists interested in bringing ‘the Marxist method’ to bear on their own research and writings. Still others among them were engaged in sociological excavations to rediscover ‘the early Marx’. Though they were always a minority within the New Left, the neo-or-revisionist Marxists had deeper roots in the labour movement than the empirical ‘socialist humanists’ belonging to the Universities and Left Review tendency, and they stamped their neo-Marxism on the New Left as early as 1957. This was, in turn, a reflection of their factional experience and political maturity, their talents and their uncompromising opposition to the values of the Establishment.
However, the neo-Marxist analysis of contemporary society to which the New Left as a whole was irrevocably committed was not generally recognised by outsiders. Only the odd discerning reader realised that the cultural sociology of Raymond Williams, Stuart Hall, and Richard Hoggart was becoming subordinate to the evolving ideology of the neo-Marxist tendency. Thus Professor Cameron devoted all of three broadcast talks to a scrutiny of the New Left’s political philosophy, and to a critique of its ‘vestigial Bolshevism’. Being resident in the University of Leeds, where the New Left philosopher Alasdair MacIntyre was issuing his ‘Notes from the Moral Wilderness’, Professor Cameron was in an unusually good position to sound out what was going on in the New Left. Those who were less discerning saw it as a cultural movement or as a political movement interested in ‘cultural’ questions, as opposed to the basic bread-and-butter preoccupations of the Old Left.
Occasionally a few American socialists appeared to possess a much sharper insight into the predicament of the New Left than any observers or commentators, whether critical or sympathetic, in Britain. Thus C Wright Mills touched the heart of the problem when he appealed to the New Left to scuttle ‘the labour metaphysic’. [2] A variant of this approach was seen in the penetrating comments of Irving Howe, an editor of the American socialist journal, Dissent, when he wrote: ‘I suspect that in their stress upon the working-class neighbourhood and its indigenous culture men like Williams and Hoggart are turning to something that is fast slipping away.’ But while Wright Mills wanted the New Left to repudiate the idea that the working class is an historic agency of change, Irving Howe criticised their ‘organic vision of socialism for being a bit too harmonious and, if I may risk being misunderstood, a bit too wholesome’. He and the other editors of Dissent had repeatedly expressed their solidarity with the Marxist revisionists in Poland and Hungary (as had the editors of The New Reasoner), yet even Howe was attracted to Universities and Left Review  —  a journal which showed little interest in the Marxist revisionists in Eastern Europe  —  and to writers like Raymond Williams and Richard Hoggart who lacked ‘a touch of anarchist disaffection that would burst out no matter “who is the state"’. [3]
But then the cultural apparatus of the New Left was based in London, and within a stone’s throw of the great publishing houses and the quality newspapers. The Partisan ('London’s left-wing coffee house’) was situated in Soho’s Carlyle Street which also housed a socialist library and the editorial and administrative offices of Universities and Left Review. For journalists and foreign visitors, this was the New Left; and a New Left which, if Raymond Williams’ work was anything to go by, belonged to a long line of British radical dissent. In any case the New Left in London was a widespread movement, with weekly political meetings in various basements in Oxford Street pulling in audiences of 500, and reinforced by adjuncts as far-ranging as the Left Scientists group, the Education group, the History of Socialism group, the Literature group, the Social Priorities group, the London Schools Left Club (for teenagers still at school), and an International Forum.
A high-watermark of the activity and achievement of the movement was the merging of Universities and Left Review and The New Reasoner into New Left Review in December 1959. In the last issue of The New Reasoner, the decision to thrust ‘forward into the Red Sixties’ (the phrase is Isaac Deutscher’s) was defended, and the foundation of New Left Review justified as a means of providing ‘a stimulus and a sense of direction to the movement’. [4] As it happened, the neo-Marxist tendency lost more from the fusion of the two journals than it gained; and nothing was heard in the pages of New Left Review of the Marxist revisionists in Eastern Europe or of the neo-Marxists or dissident communists in Britain.
At the same time Out of Apathy was published as the first of a series of New Left Books aiming at a ‘moral diagnosis of contemporary society’. It was (apart from a reprint of Irving Howe’s Literature and Politics) also the last book to be published in that series under the imprint of New Left Books.
Out of Apathy was given good reviews in the general as well as in the labour press, and held out the promise of providing dissident communists, disenchanted Bevanites and rationalist CNDers with a common rationale for their hectic and sometimes near-anarchistic political activities. Then the New Left political movement dipped towards a decline  —  a dip that was soon to escalate into a gallop. By the end of 1961 New Left Review had a circulation of 9000; two years later the circulation had dropped to under 4000.
By the beginning of 1959 the New Left movement had 45 clubs scattered throughout the country. Some of them were firmly tied to traditional labour organisations (that is, the trade unions and the Labour Party), and others, like the Fife Socialist League, were straddled between the Labour Party and the Communist Party, poaching members from both, injecting the ideas of ‘socialist humanism’ into the trade unions at the pit and factory level, and struggling for the soul of the labour movement. In the industrial North of England and in Scotland the neo-Marxists grouped around The New Reasoner were not content merely to assert their adherence to class struggle, socialist humanism and the role of human agency as against an impersonal historic process; they were also preparing themselves, in the phrase of Ralph Miliband, for ‘the politics of the long haul’. A New Left monthly journal called Forum was beamed at rank-and-file militants in factories, mines and workshops; and was later replaced by industrial bulletins putting the case of the neo-Marxists in the plain language of the industrial worker. Many of the rank-and-file industrial workers in the New Left cooperated with the agitational plans and projects of the Socialist Labour League, the main Trotskyist organisation in Britain, while gently but firmly chiding Gerry Healy, Peter Fryer and Brian Behan (then forming the Trotskyist high command) for their petty and unfraternal attacks on the New Left revisionist intellectuals. For example, Lawrence Daly, the most talented and influential worker in the New Left (and now Scottish secretary of the National Union of Miners), announced his ‘critical support’ (a phrase popular in Marxist circles) for the Trotskyist National Industrial Rank-and-File Conference in 1958, thus suggesting that the far-left had finally ‘made it’. A perceptive journalist in The Times had no such illusions, and committed his own prognostications to paper: ‘The composition of the group is so diverse that it would be surprising if they were to cohere for long.’ When Peter Fryer, Brian Behan and Alasdair MacIntyre (a late-comer to the Socialist Labour League) baled out of their commitment to Trotskyism a year later, the prediction of The Times was vindicated.
Nonetheless the neo-Marxists, while assisting the industrial workers of their tendency by helping them to produce industrial bulletins, had not forgotten that theoretical work is the chief province of Marxist intellectuals, and their contribution to neo-Marxist creativity was impressive. A whole host of books manifesting a neo-Marxist tendency came off the printing presses before and after the abortive New Left Books venture had failed. Among them were Parliamentary Socialism by Ralph Miliband, Puritanism and Revolution by Christopher Hill, Essays in Labour History by John Saville and Asa Briggs, Scottish Literature and the Scottish People by David Craig, The Trumpet Shall Sound by Peter Worsley, The Making of the English Working Class by EP Thompson, and Victor Serge’s Memoirs of a Revolutionary, translated, edited and with an introduction by Peter Sedgwick.
The central predicament of the New Left was that as its ‘moral diagnosis’ of British capitalism was assimilated by the Establishment, and its cultural prescriptions and remedies accepted for consideration by socio-cultural committees and party committees in Transport House, a division between the two tendencies was building up. That was not, however, the only source of tension, but rather a symptom of unresolved theoretical divergences and conflicting practical aims as a whole.
The half-partisan authoritarian voices in the background kept nagging and insisting that the New Left should drop the ‘Labour metaphysic’. In an early issue of New Left Review, EP Thompson offered a stringent, though fraternal, criticism of Raymond Williams’ book, The Long Revolution, on the grounds that his model of society had made insufficient allowance for the creative role of the class struggle. In the event, Thompson’s neo-Marxist creativity met defeat in an internal factional struggle. Despite the dominant faction’s obsession with ‘images’ and cultural ‘fashions’ (Brecht, for example, replacing Sean O'Casey), the crippling voices of a sectarian past kept creeping into the pages of New Left Review. Not a few of the voices were new, belonging, as they did, to the sophisticated but politically innocent; yet the tone had been shaped in the 1930s when Stalin was enjoying his heyday.
Thus the editor of New Left Review could write of the situation in Cuba: 
Elections and party government is seen now as a rupturing of the transitional period, slowing down its pace and altering its style. It would formalise the system and fracture the fraternity between people and leaders formed in the revolutionary war. With the memory of Batista’s electoral hoax fresh in their minds, the Cuban poor regard elections as a bureaucratic postponement of the revolution. [5]
Once the creative role of the working class, whether reformist labour or dissident communist, had been written off, the majority of new leftists fell back on a mythology of socialist saints and reactionary sinners. (After Labour lost the general election in 1959 Universities and Left Review held a meeting in London under the title ‘The Permanent Tory Majority’.) Hence the search for allies, enemies and revolutions as engines of history in the backward countries, where the class lines could be sharply drawn and the saints and demons allotted their historic roles. When the indigenous working class had failed to act out its preordained historic role, the substitutionalists soon found their saints and saviours in Cuba and Algeria. By the late autumn of 1961 Stuart Hall (the only full-time functionary in the New Left) had vacated the editorial chair of New Left Review and the substitutionalists had also succeeded in edging the neo-Marxists out of the New Left altogether. The New Left had died as it had begun, in a mood of weary, disgruntled defeat.
The factional fight was fierce and prolonged, and duplicated factional documents were circulated among the leadership. Yet no public statement was ever made or published concerning the differences that divided what has not inaccurately been called the old New Left and the new New Left. At the root of the conflict was a mood, just as a mood had played a large part in the evolution of the New Left in the 1950s. Not that the upheavals of 1956, with the revolt in the Communist Party and the disenchantment of the Bevanites, would not inevitably have led to a regrouping of left-wing forces in Britain. A peculiar confluence of circumstances and political forces was present at the birth of the New Left. And so at its death; for die it did, though a journal called New Left Review still issues from the old editorial offices in Soho.
EP Thompson led the attack of the defeated faction who favoured greater political activity and less concern with ‘images’ and cultural fashions. Paradoxically, the victorious faction led by Perry Anderson, the present editor of New Left Review, had come from nowhere. They had belonged to neither of the tendencies in the old New Left, and they were largely unknown outside of Oxford, where they had produced a student socialist journal called New University. Culturally and politically they are now the equivalent of the Social-Democratic Federation when it went through its worst sectarian phase  —  except that the SDF believed in human agency rather than passive political comment and back-seat driving. This new New Left believes in the inevitable ‘logic of history’ rather than the class struggle or labour reformism.
A page of New Left history, of strivings and searchings for a humanistic socialism built by working people themselves had closed. [6] As the New Left in Britain collapsed, a whole crop of New Left movements sprang up in America.

Notes
1. EP Thompson, ‘Agency and Choice’, The New Reasoner, Summer 1958. In this essay Thompson captured the mood of the neo-Marxists in the New Left when he wrote: ‘Marx’s greatness lies in his refusal to fall into facile economic progressivism on the one hand, or equally facile moral absolutism on the other.’
2. C Wright Mills, ‘Open Letter to the New Left’, New Left Review, September 1960.
3. Irving Howe, ‘A Mind’s Turning’, Dissent, Winter 1960.
4. EP Thompson, ‘A Pressay in Ephology’, The New Reasoner, Autumn 1959.
5. Stuart Hall and Norman Fruckter, ‘Notes on the Cuban Dilemma’, New Left Review, May-June 1961.
6. See my article, ‘The Two Faces of Socialism’, Socialist Commentary, October 1963, where I discuss the democratic and authoritarian conceptions of socialism.
 


James D Young Archive

rialism and Revolution by James D Young 1969


James D Young 1969
Industrialism and Revolution
Source: Survey, no 73, Autumn 1969. Scanned and prepared for the Marxist Internet Archive by Paul Flewers.
The industrialisation of England between 1780 and 1832 and the response of the pre-industrial labour force to that cataclysmic social, economic, cultural and political experience is the central motif of EP Thompson’s brilliant and fascinating book. [1] The Making of the English Working Class was first published in 1963, and Thompson has added a postscript to this new Pelican edition of his work in which he impressively defends himself against his critics and detractors. He has, of course, very little difficulty in demolishing the criticisms and arguments of the dominant British school of right-wing economic historians who still persist in regarding working people as statistical fodder in the evolution of what Thompson characterises as their ‘Pilgrim’s Progress orthodoxy’. Nevertheless, his persistent use of the word ideology in the pejorative sense against economic historians is rather odd in a man who places himself in the Marxist tradition.
This study of the ‘making’ of the English proletariat has, however, raised as many questions as it answers; and the low theoretical level of Marxist historiography and the general lack of knowledge concerning Marxism among so-called ‘bourgeois’ historians is such that many important historical problems are neglected by historians and sociologists alike. It is, for example, difficult to see how Thompson could square the Brechtian values he attributes to the English pre-industrial labour force with the general Marxist criticism of the ‘primitive rebels’ who litter historical territory. This problem touches on the role of human consciousness in history and in the evolution of society.
EP Thompson’s description of the ‘secret history’ of the English resistance to industrialisation brings us against the fact that many of the British revolutionaries of this period were either déclassé elements or they were culturally alienated from their own society. Marxist historians in the West are now vaguely aware of the continuity of ‘cultural alienation’ among Irish revolutionaries from John Doherty to Willie Gallacher, and this recognition has created problems for them which they are not really conscious of. Since Marxists hold that ‘false consciousness’ is the consciousness of individuals in ‘a condition of alienation’, how could this continuity of cultural alienation represent either working-class consciousness or working-class culture? And why were there so few authentic working men contributing to the ‘radical culture’ which Thompson regards as one of the great achievements of the Industrial Revolution? Perhaps such questions are too heretical for even dissident thinkers like Thompson.
EP Thompson’s contribution to historiography is considerable. Moreover, his efforts to ‘rescue the poor stockinger, the Luddite cropper, the “obsolete” hand-loom weaver, the “utopian” artisan, and even the deluded follower of Joanna Southcott, from the enormous condescension of posterity’ are admirable; and his rediscovery of the important dimension of human agency in the history-making-process should help to mitigate the dangers of a one-dimensional society evolving in the future. But his hatred of industrialism  —  and the agencies creating industrialism  —  is so fierce that the historian who wrote William Morris: Romantic to Revolutionary in 1955 is probably mapping out a title for mapping his own biographer: Revolutionary to Romantic.
The work by EJ Hobsbawm, [2] a stimulating and gifted historian of the orthodox Marxist persuasion, is an impressive history of the economic and social convulsions which have transformed Britain since the beginnings of the Industrial Revolution. In a somewhat haughty, aloof and élitist manner he vividly describes the origins, developments and social consequences of the first and second Industrial Revolution. He takes full account of the impact of industrialisation on the formation of class consciousness among proletarians and entrepreneurs alike; but he ignores the same cultural patterns in the ‘socialist countries’ (sic!) he contrasts with the advanced industrial societies in Western Europe. He accepts the traditional view that the Industrial Revolution represents a fundamental watershed in world history, yet he is not aware of the revolutionary character of the entrepreneurs in the eighteenth century. They were, in fact, far more revolutionary than the proletariat.
EJ Hobsbawm’s description of the origins and social consequences of the Industrial Revolution is distinctive and interesting, but hardly original. The main criticism of Industry and Empire is that (like its predecessor, Reformation to Industrial Revolution by Christopher Hill) it often reads like a synthesis of the arguments and debates which rage in the Economic History Review. His chapter on ‘the beginnings of the decline’ abounds in useful new insights into the causes of the so-called ‘Great Depression’ between 1873 and 1896. Here Dr Hobsbawm convincingly argues that the British Empire which made the metropolis, in Marx’s phrase, ‘the despot of the world market’, eventually resulted in Britain’s relative decline as an industrial nation. Also he admits that the backwardness of our educational system, the social stigma linked to any form of technical education, and the barriers against social and labour mobility are not easily explained in either economic or social terms. He is nevertheless on very strong ground when he says that the politicians and entrepreneurs in the metropolis ‘always had a line of retreat open’: 
We could retreat further into both Empire and Free Trade  —  into our monopoly of as yet undeveloped regions, which in itself helped to keep them unindustrialised, and into our functions as the hub of the world’s trading, shipping and financial transactions. We did not have to compete but could evade.
Dr Hobsbawm also thinks that by 1848 socialism had, as he puts it, ‘disappeared from the land of its birth’. Furthermore, ‘there were no socialists to dream of a new society. There were trade unions, seeking to exploit the laws of political economy in order to create a scarcity of their kind of labour and thus increase their members’ wages’. In the 1960s socialism is, he thinks, stone dead. This conclusion springs from the misconception that working-class socialism is essentially ‘belly socialism’. But socialism has on the basis of Dr Hobsbawm’s own internal evidence been a long time a-dying. In the general field of labour history he overrates the importance of the ‘aristocracy of labour’, and in my own  —  admittedly subjective  —  experience as a youth in a ‘lower’ working-class environment, he creates an artificial dichotomy between the manual and the skilled workers in his evaluation of working-class culture. His basic shortcoming as a social historian is that he has no imaginative insight into the ethos of working-class life; and so he bemoans the passing of working-class ‘culture’ and the impersonality of the new housing estates, and all the rest of the romantic ‘look-back-in-anger’ elements in our café society culture. Experience in the ‘lower depths’ would have cured him of these illusions, and therefore equipped him to recognise the positive features of the new council housing estates. But the criticism that one can level against him is a tribute to his stature as a major British historian. He is a sort of AJP Taylor who is more committed to an intransigent puritan socialist morality, interlaced with non-working-class interests, and crowned by the guilt complexes of an upper-class Englishman.
Notes
1. EP Thompson, The Making of the English Working Class (Pelican, Harmondsworth).
2. Eric J Hobsbawm, An Economic and Social History of Britain Since 1730 (Weidenfeld and Nicolson, London).
 


James D Young Archive




m, Liberalism and the Process of Industrialisation by James D Young 1969


James D Young 1969
Marxism, Liberalism and the Process of Industrialisation
Source: Survey, no 71/72, Winter/Spring 1969. Scanned and prepared for the Marxist Internet Archive by Paul Flewers.
* * *
During the past decade a perverted form of Marxism has penetrated the consciousness of economic historians, sociologists and economists in Europe and America as well as in the Third World. This preoccupation with the type of problem raised by Karl Marx in the nineteenth century has been reflected in one of the influential books of the postwar era, The Stages of Economic Growth: A Non-Communist Manifesto by WW Rostow. Since Rostow’s book first appeared in 1960 an increasing number of scholars entrenched in the universities of Western Europe and America have devoted a good deal of attention to the genesis, social structure and ideological underpinnings of industrial capitalism. In contrast to Karl Marx, who declared that capitalism had come into the world ‘dripping with blood from head to foot’, a new school of scholars led by TS Ashton, WH Hutt, NG Smelser and EE Lampton have presented a sophisticated defence of early British capitalism. Thus Ashton has written: ‘The notion that the coming of factories meant a “depersonalisation” of relations in industry is the reverse of the truth.’
Side by side with the revision of the historical studies undertaken by the pessimists  —  for example, Marx, Engels, the Hammonds and the Webbs  —  concerning the conditions of the British working people during the Industrial Revolution, a critique of the arguments of Max Weber and RH Tawney has gained widespread currency in the academic world. The role of ideological motivation in the rise of liberal capitalism among entrepreneurs  —  and particularly the role of religion and the protestant ethic  —  are in partial disrepute. [1] Nevertheless, a rehabilitation of the role traditionally allotted to ideological motivation in the advent of liberal capitalism among the proletariat  —  and, perhaps more importantly, in initiating the pattern of socialisation and in underpinning the new forms of social control  —  has been attempted by sociologists and historians such as Eric Fromm, EP Thompson and Sidney Pollard.
In The Decay of Capitalist Civilisation Sidney and Beatrice Webb insisted that the initial success of liberal capitalism had rested on its ability ‘to apply the whip of starvation’. Notwithstanding the Webbs’ original insights into the methods of social control evolved by British capitalists during the Industrial Revolution, the training of the proletariat was, in fact, a very complex process in which ‘the whip of starvation’ played a relatively minor role. The socialisation of former domestic workers, Irish immigrants and Scottish Highlanders, or the transformation of the peasantry and pre-industrial labour force into a factory proletariat was achieved (in the colourful phrase of Sidney Pollard) through ‘an assault on working-class morals’.
By the early 1960s the socialisation of the pre-industrial labour force by means of ideological indoctrination was mapped out by sociologists as an essential feature of the early phases of industrialisation. British and American scholars recognised that the creation of ‘a new work-discipline’ had led entrepreneurs, whether they were right-wing authoritarians like Josiah Wedgwood or left-wing humanitarians like Robert Owen, to hack out a new character-structure for the emerging proletariat suitable to an industrial environment and compatible with a hierarchical social structure. Moreover, the perfection of clock time or the instruments for measuring ‘socially necessary labour time’ produced, in the opinion of some students of industrialisation, a regularisation of the new work rhythms of industrial civilisation.
Therefore sociologists and historians have seen work-discipline as an inevitable and automatic feature of industrial capitalism at a certain stage of evolution. This approach has enabled communist and left-wing scholars to see in the Irish immigrants a sub-strata of the British proletariat who were ‘docile’ and ‘willing’ to accept starvation wages. In opposition to those scholars who have seen the socio-economic behaviour of the Irish in Britain during the Industrial Revolution as a feature of industrialisation, many communist and authoritarian socialist scholars have traced the strike-breaking activities of the Irish immigrants back to inherent racial or character defects. This fitted in well with the theoretical position of those communist academics who lauded the Luddites (Eric J Hobsbawm, for example, described ‘machine-breaking as a form of collective bargaining’), and simultaneously characterised working-class opposition to industrialisation in communist countries as ‘sabotage’ and ‘crimes against the state’.
In Britain during the Industrial Revolution the training and work-discipline of the indigenous labour force required ‘steady methodical application, inner motivation of sobriety, forethought, and punctilious observation of contracts’. Those who were culturally alienated from the evolving industrial society  —  for example, the Irish and the Scottish Highlanders  —  were also essential as a supplementary labour force. Thus EP Thompson has argued that in England:
... the heavy manual occupations at the base of industrial society required a spendthrift expense of sheer physical energy  —  an alternation of intensive labour and boisterous relaxation which belongs to pre-industrial labour rhythms, and for which the English artisan or weaver was unsuited both by reason of his weakened physique and his Puritan temperament. [2]
This argument is capped by the assertion that ‘the worker had to be turned into his own slave-driver’.
This argument is cogently presented, and truly ingenious in its conception of how the process of industrialisation was accomplished in Britain. There are, however, a few uncomfortable facts which have been overlooked in this view of the forces creating an industrial proletariat. A recent study of an important agency for inculcating the new moral values of industrialism into working people has called into question the extent to which a section of the Scottish proletariat was exposed to capitalist ideology. [3] What is needed to back up Thompson’s argument is a statistical analysis of the number of working people who attended church or who were exposed in other institutions to the moral values of the emergent industrial society. Another important factor which has been ignored is the way the trade unions not only opted for capitalist values, but also operated sanctions against their own members who were in danger of practising the customs and traditions of the pre-industrial labour force. This happened in some cases in the eighteenth century before the new ideology of industrial capitalism had been firmly established. The building trade unions in the eighteenth century, for example: 
... excluded anyone ‘defiling themselves with unclean women  —  committing adultery  —  being guilty of any lewd, obnoxious or disloyal practices whereby he may be liable to public censure from Church or state...’. Nor would it admit any ‘drunkard, swearer, or Sabbath-breaker’. From a sociological standpoint these rules were further complicated by the fact that they combined ‘economy with Puritanism’. [4]
A further significant point is that the trade unions among the agricultural workers often encouraged secret oaths and the values of pre-industrial society. The existence of a multi-dimensional bourgeois culture is as plausible an explanation for differing labour rhythms in a society undergoing industrialisation as the divergent elements in the labour force created by the transitional stage of the new industrial society. In the case of the building trade unions in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, the new rules and sanctions  —  and the working-class values underlying them  —  hinted at a community or plurality of interests which are the antithesis of a monolithic, totalitarian trade-union movement. However, it is only during the past few years that scholars have questioned the traditional Marxist assumption that the culture of British capitalism and industrial man are inseparable.
What then is the exact relationship between industrialism and capitalism? As this question has been hotly debated in academic circles by American and European liberals, a group of scholars led by Clark Kerr has evolved the theory of convergence. All modern capitalist and communist societies are, according to this theory, becoming alike. The theory of convergence is, in fact, based, in the words of Walter Laqueur, ‘on the assumption that industrialisation and urbanisation create a civilisation common to all modern societies, not only similar forms of production but also political institutions that are alike’. [5] A number of liberal scholars have questioned the convergence theory; and Raymond Aron has drawn attention to ‘the different types of industrial society’ in the contemporary world.
Among the overwhelming majority of Marxists the consensus of opinion is that industrialism and capitalism in Western Europe are inseparable. A few Marxists, whose antecedents are rooted in the prewar Trotskyist Fourth International, adhere to the theory that capitalism and industrialism are also inseparable in the so-called ‘socialist third of the world’. [6] A variant of the convergence theory is seen in Bertram D Wolfe’s claim that ‘many of the features which Marx identified with “capitalism” were actually features of modern industry under any ism’. [7] In the contemporary ‘socialist’ countries undergoing the process of industrialisation the ‘features which Marx identified with capitalism’  —  the division of labour, the exploitation of labour and wage differentials  —  are both visible and identifiable. But are these features characteristics of industrialism or capitalism? This problem is wrapped up in metaphysics and semantic difficulties, and there is no easy or definitive answer to it.
Nonetheless, a neo-Marxist has argued that ‘one way of reading the working-class movement during the Industrial Revolution is as a movement of resistance to the annunciation of economic man’. [8] In an earlier study this same historian recognised that the process of industrialisation inevitably produces successive stages and evolutionary cultural and economic patterns. Thus he wrote: ‘It is notorious that in the early stages of industrialisation, the growing towns attract uprooted and migrant labour of all types; this is still the experience of Africa and Asia today.’ [9] Here he is employing God’s most precious gift to the historian: hindsight; and he seems to imply that everything is inevitable after it has happened more than once. At least Marx has a different methodological approach, and, when he says that history ‘does nothing’, he is trying to break out of the limits of his own determinist philosophy. Contemporary Marxists and neo-Marxists are only now beginning to face the question of the validity and effectiveness of making a moral critique of an inevitable historical process.
VG Kiernan, a neo-Marxist, who has gone much further in his ‘critical criticism’ of traditional Marxist concepts than his co-thinkers such as Ralph Miliband and EP Thompson, now recognises that ‘for Marxism today the study of ethics, not in the abstract but in the setting of history, cannot be treated as a mere annexe to be built on to it, but must become an integral part of it’. [10] This recognition of the problem of the dichotomous relationship between Marxist ethics and contemporary Marxist historiography and sociology has not yet led Kiernan to confront the logical contradictions within Marxist philosophy itself. Nevertheless, he is, I think, worrying over his own intellectual assumptions when he questions whether it really is possible to criticise morally an inevitable process in any adequate way. He has tried to resolve this problem by arguing thus: ‘Marx took ethics for granted, assuming that all men not blinded by prejudice or self-interest must think alike about social morality. What he thought must be gathered from what he condemned as wrong, child labour in factories for example.’ [11] Few other Marxists would agree with his judgement; and, though Kiernan’s novel explanation is not entirely convincing, it has the merit of raising the problem of ethics in relation to general socialist activity. This is particularly relevant to socialist attitudes in relation to the problems of industrialisation. Kiernan has, however, evaded as much as he has ‘explained’, since even neo-Marxists accept the thesis of inevitable ‘stages of economic growth’. How can Marxists argue that the extermination of the Scottish Highlanders was necessary for the growth of British capitalism, and yet morally criticise the historical actors who brought this about?
In 1963 EP Thompson justified his study The Making of the English Working Class by undermining ‘the lessons of history’: 
... the greater part of the world today is still undergoing problems of industrialisation, and of the formation of democratic institutions, analogous in many ways to our own experience during the Industrial Revolution. Causes which were lost in England might, in Asia or Africa, yet be won.
A central theme of this book is the role of ‘inevitability’ in history. Against the almost demonic impersonal power of ‘inevitability’ he offers the counterpoise of ‘human agency’, that is, the choice and options open to individuals in the making of history. In Britain during the Industrial Revolution, he argues, ‘it still is not possible to speak of “totalitarian” or “Asiatic” despotism’. Meanwhile the experience in contemporary countries undergoing industrialisation has not encouraged those neo-Marxists, who in the mid-1950s and early 1960s had hoped to see a reconciliation of democratic institutions and industrialisation in the Third World. This socio-economic reality has prompted Herbert Marcuse to argue that industrialisation in the contemporary world dictates totalitarianism. Here the arguments of most right-wing and left-wing sociologists and historians about the social character of industrialisation in the contemporary world have tended to coalesce.
Industrialisation in Britain during the period between 1750 and 1860 was not ‘despotic’ or ‘totalitarian’ any more than it arose from democratic consensus. This fundamental fact was decisive in allowing working-class values, class-consciousness and institutions to emerge and crystallise in opposition to the cultural dominance of the ruling élite. In Russia, however, the first surge towards industrialisation came between 1870 and 1918. A great deal of technical and managerial skill was provided by the Germans; the British provided most of the capital equipment; and the French provided most of the capital invested in coal, iron and textiles. By 1918 Russia was still very backward when compared to West European countries. The country was not just backward quantitatively, but also in terms of economic efficiency. Output per worker remained very low, and so did wages.
Russian industrialisation emerged in the context of autocratic feudalism, and the nascent working classes were subjected to intense exploitation. Housing conditions were bad, hours of work were long, industrial accidents were frequent, and strikes were often put down by force. [12] In Russia in Revolution 1890-1918 Lionel Kochan has argued that ‘no antithesis exists between industrialisation and an authoritarian political system. On the contrary, industrialisation supplies its own, improved methods of social control.’ [13] Contemporary opinion was not so sure about the effectiveness of the new methods of social control. Indeed one writer was of the opinion that in this period ‘the half-peasant character of our factory proletariat gives it a peculiar, rebellious trait’. A major problem confronting the Russian entrepreneur at this time was the link between the factory and village, which enabled many peasant-workers to resist the temptation to commit themselves fully to factory life. This probably slowed down the process of industrialisation and the formation of a permanent working class.
An important consequence of the factory-village link was the absence of a fully developed sense of class-consciousness among the industrial proletariat, since the proletariat were, in sociological jargon, only semi-committed to industrialism. ‘The half-peasant character of the factory proletariat’ delayed the formation of the labour movement, which by the time it arrived on the Russian scene in the early twentieth century lacked experience in working-class democracy and self-activity. As late as 1904 the early factory workers were essentially peasants who yearned for life on the soil. As Theodore H Von Laue has written: 
Behind this worker stood the foreman ready to fine him for dremlenie, for daydreaming and the shoddy work it caused. The peasant-worker’s exertions in the factory were shorn of their spiritual wholeness. The connexion between his inner motivation and his outward motions had been severed, the harmony broken. [14]
Under Tsarism the Russian proletariat had been deprived of the type of conditions which had made it possible for the British ‘working class to make itself as much as it was made’. At that time the Russian class structure was fluid; and some newspapers had pressed the bureaucracy into granting limited protection to the factory workers. The next stage of industrialisation witnessed the creation of a proletariat ‘committed’ (that is, in the sense of being thrown into a prison) to industrial society.
Whether Russian socio-economic experience can be mapped out as a scientifically recognisable stage of economic growth between 1860 and 1917 à la Rostow, a distinct pattern of industrialisation was nonetheless discernible. As Rostow puts it: 
With 1861, and the freeing of the serfs, the process of creating the preconditions for take-off accelerates: both technically  —  in the build-up of social overhead capital and the bases for modern industry  —  and in terms of the ideas, attitudes and aspirations of various groups of Russians. Then, by 1890 or so, the Russian take-off begins.
On the other hand Raymond Aron has convincingly pointed out that it is a myth to suppose ‘capitalism necessarily evolves into socialism (Soviet style)’. [15] The crux of the problem has been outlined by Alexander Gerschenkron in a discussion of the socio-economic prerequisites of modern industrialisation: ‘the Soviet case is a very peculiar one, and for many reasons pre-revolutionary Russia seems to provide a much more “normal” case for a discussion of specific patterns of substitution in the process of industrialisation’. [16]
Within this context the Russian working class was evolving as ‘a social and cultural formation’ rather than as a ‘thing’. Moreover, if the evolving Russian working class was not able to ‘make itself’ in a democratic environment, it still had some autonomy. Indeed, Leon Trotsky described ‘the political strike’ of the workers in the early years of the twentieth century as ‘the battering ram which the awakening nation directs against the walls of absolutism’. For Trotsky ‘the political strike’ employed by the Russian workers, ‘so rare in Western Europe’, was a new and fundamental form of struggle.’ [17] On the other hand Gerschenkron has compared the Russian labour movement at this time to the German labour movement during the heyday of Bebel and Liebknecht. As Gerschenkron puts the argument:
Similarly, the economic position of labour was clearly improving. In the resurgence of the strike movement economic problems seemed to predominate. It is true, of course, that in the specific conditions of the period any wage conflict tended to assume a political character because of the ready interventions of the police and military forces on behalf of management. But this did not mean that the climate of opinion and emotion within the labour movement was becoming more revolutionary; as is shown by the history of European countries (such as Austria or Belgium), sharp political struggles marked the period of the formation of labour movements that in actual fact, though not always in the language used, were committed to reform. There is little doubt that the Russian labour movement of those years was slowly turning towards revisionist and trade-unionist lines. [18]
Whether we agree with Trotsky or Gerschenkron  —  and the evidence supports the latter  —  a striking feature of the Russian labour movement was the absence of major indigenous working-class leaders.
The absence of proletarian revolutions in Europe in the 1920s, envisaged by the leaders of the Third International, compelled the Bolshevik theoreticians to revise traditional Marxist concepts. Marx had assumed ‘the primitive accumulation of capital’ to be a basic prerequisite for a society undergoing industrialisation; and he had further assumed that socialism could only be built on the foundations of an industrial society. So, in order to rescue Lenin’s ‘operational Marxism’ from Marx’s inhibiting concepts concerning the preconditions for socialism, Trotsky and Preobrazhensky advanced the theory of ‘the primitive socialist accumulation of capital’ and rapid industrialisation.
By the early 1920s the creation of an authoritarian form of work-discipline and the eradication of absenteeism, bad time-keeping and disobedience in factories and mines had been initiated by the Communist Party. The trade unions had also been robbed of their real function as associations for the protection and improvement of working-class wages and working conditions. The transition to totalitarian rule was facilitated by the Russian tradition of autocratic feudalism and authoritarian rule under Lenin. In 1930 Kh Rakovsky, a dissident Bolshevik, declared: ‘A ruling class other than the proletariat is crystallising before our eyes.’ Moreover, the Stalinist bureaucracy indoctrinated the workers with the sort of ‘bourgeois’ values which were common to the early stages of industrialisation in Britain. As well as introducing new forms of social control by means of what the Webbs, in another context, characterised as ‘applying the whip of starvation’ to discipline the working class, the ruling bureaucracy also used the bait of incentives in the form of piece-work rates. Stalinist theoreticians tried to justify wage differentials and piece-work rates as ‘socialist emulation’. But Marx had been scathing in his criticism of piece-work, and there were no texts in his writings to vindicate piece-work in any conceivable circumstances. As Marx wrote: ‘Piece-work therefore lay the foundations of the modern “domestic labour,” as well as of a hierarchically organised system of exploitation and oppression.’ [19]
The dichotomy between Marx’s views on piece-work and piece-wages and Stalinist practice created a ‘false consciousness’ in the bureaucrats who had to cope with the tensions and contradictions of this unforeseen situation. The fact that the Stalinists succeeded in imposing a total ‘harmony’ between the worker’s ‘inner motivation and his outward motions’ was the central feature of Russian industrialisation under a totalitarian dictatorship. In this situation the Russian working class had no opportunity to ‘make itself’, and, whether or not Dwight MacDonald’s conjecture of the inseparable relationship between totalitarianism and ‘mass man’ had a foundation in reality, the Russian workers had no autonomous class culture of their own. A plural culture is anathema in a totalitarian society. The relationship between the character-structure of the Russian working class and the social structure during the Stalinist phase of industrialisation has not been studied in depth, yet Hans Gerth and C Wright Mills justified it thus:
The key importance, in fact, of the rise of the Soviet Union to great international stature lies in this simple fact: for the first time in the intricate history of the industrial revolution men can now see that this industrialisation does not require capitalism as an institutional framework, that it can be accomplished without depending upon private initiative, and that when it is carried out by state bureaucrats, industrialisation can even be a more rapid and orderly process than when carried out by private capitalists running private firms for private profits. [20]
A considerable number of democratic socialists in the advanced industrial societies took it for granted in the 1950s and early 1960s that the industrialisation of backward countries could only be achieved by the decree of dictatorial élites. C Wright Mills, who came out of a ‘Wobbly’ family in Texas, was no exception, and he thereby abrogated the philosophy of democratic socialism.
In the Stalinist era the key factor in creating ‘an inner motivation’ in the Russian working class had been the social character of totalitarianism. The Stalinist bureaucracy exorcised ‘the motivational conflicts’ of the workers, the broken harmony of their inner motivations and their outward motions, by means of psychological terrorism. This terrorism had partially depended on a still evolving ‘Marxist’ ideology, of the legitimatisation of a ‘false consciousness’ in traditional Marxist terms, compatible with the needs of rapid industrialisation. Under Stalin industrialisation was accelerated by a powerful national afflatus, an impulse to make up for lost opportunities in Tsarist times, and by the bureaucracy’s objective economic compulsions  —  for example, by the need to ‘attract uprooted and migrant labour of all types’ into the factories, mines and collective farms, and by the crucial need to catch up with other industrial nations.
The process by which the socialisation of the Russian working class was accomplished in the Stalin era has been inevitably wrapped in obscurity. Marxists are generally more interested in masses than in individuals, and only a handful of Marxists have made a serious study of the role of human agency in the historical process. Leon Trotsky was, for example, compelled to invent a fictitious character, ‘a collective Markin’, who embodied all the virtues of the ‘proletarian’ (sic!) makers of the Bolshevik revolution. Between the period when Russia embarked upon rapid industrialisation and her emergence as a major industrial power the bureaucracy had succeeded in ‘making’ a modern proletariat. Neither Marxist nor liberal scholars have so far displayed much interest in how this was accomplished, and there are few signs of their being willing to do so in the future. If the intellectuals opt for rapid industrialisation, and justify this course of action by futurist arguments, the methods by which the pre-industrial labour force is moulded in the crucible of societies undergoing industrialisation will seem to be an irrelevance.
And yet the character of the socialisation of pre-industrial labour will determine whether democratic or totalitarian forms of government emerge during the process of industrialisation in the developing world. Under Stalin industrialisation was ‘purchased at a catastrophic cost to human consciousness’. In the metamorphosis of Russian industrialisation the potential ‘Luddites’ were transformed into Stakhanovites. By contrast industrialisation in Britain was accompanied by ‘sharp and, in the main, open social struggle’: 
From this process of social struggle rather than as an automatic corollary of industrialisation, the great democratic triumphs which we associate with the nineteenth century were won. They came not simply because England was being industrialised; they came because the industrialisation was accompanied by a rich social history in which a vast growth of human awareness took place. [21]
The socialisation of the Russian working class was imposed in obscurity by applying ‘the whip of starvation’, by means of terrorism, and by initiating the whole range of social controls available to a totalitarian state. As industrialisation was accomplished under a totalitarian dictatorship, the Russians were not able to produce a class-conscious working class, an ‘aristocracy of labour’ or an independent labour movement. In contrast to the British working class, the Russian working ‘class’ has not had to search for norms, and this has created its own problems. In a perceptive paragraph Alexander Gerschenkron has explained the consequences:
It can be argued that viewing the Soviet economy as ‘socialist’ does little to advance our understanding of that economy. Rather, it is the fact that the policy of rapid industrialisation has been inaugurated and maintained by a totalitarian dictatorship and that the mechanics of dictatorial power have come to dominate the economic processes; this has created curious incongruities and actually prevented, or at least delayed, the mental adjustment of the population to the normalcy of a fully industrialised society. [22]
These problems are of contemporary (as well as of historical) relevance. They are shaping contemporary socialist attitudes about the irrelevance  —  or need for  —  independent trade unions and democratic institutions in countries undergoing industrialisation. It is interesting, too, in this context to note that the attitudes of those Marxists who have written on the problems of industrialisation (for example, Eric J Hobsbawm in his introduction to Marx’s Pre-Capitalist Economic Formations) are not significantly different from those of Western liberals like WW Rostow who have offered their own prescriptions. As the communist bureaucracies emerged in the emergent countries in the postwar years, the ruling élites were increasingly forced to work out a refined ‘Marxist’ theory to justify and legitimise exploitation under communist industrialisation. Ota Sik, a Czechoslovakian Marxist, has recently argued that:
At the socialist stage of development labour is still relatively onerous (long hours) and intensive. There is a relative lack of variety, work is monotonous, and, for most people, offers little creative scope. There is still a fairly rigid division of labour, binding the majority to one occupation for life. Consequently, as a general rule people expend their labour for others, primarily because labour is the condition for acquiring from others the use values needed for themselves. [23]
Here a communist economist has captured the appeal and the ethos of contemporary communist propaganda in the emergent countries. Naturally, such propaganda has a strong emotional appeal for the technocrats, administrators and civil servants in those countries; and it has had little impact on the indigenous proletariat. Against the value-system on which the exploitation of the working class rests in those countries where the communists hold sway or are struggling for supremacy, Marx’s criticism of industrialisation still has some relevance.
In recent years Eric J Hobsbawm has argued that from 1873 onwards: 
... the development of the Russian revolutionary movement led Marx and Engels to place their hopes for a European revolution in Russia. No misinterpretation of Marx is more grotesque than the one which suggests that he expected a revolution exclusively from the advanced countries of the West.
Dr Hobsbawm has distorted the argument about Marx’s expectations  —  and consequences  —  of a socialist revolution in an underdeveloped country, yet he has unwittingly given support to the socialist critics of Stalinism by admitting that Marx’s preoccupation with Russian history in the last decade of his life sprang from his hatred of the inherent inhumanity of industrialisation. He has also conceded that Marx’s changing attitudes were conditioned by ‘his growing hatred of and contempt for capitalist society’: 
It seems probable that Marx, who had earlier welcomed the impact of Western capitalism as an inhuman but historically progressive force on stagnant pre-capitalist economies, found himself increasingly appalled by this inhumanity. [24] 
This evidence has weakened the arguments of such ‘Marxists’ as Leon Trotsky, Bruno Rizzi, C Wright Mills and Isaac Deutscher, who claimed that Stalinist industrialisation represented a progressive historical force. Dr Hobsbawm’s evidence has given no solace to those ‘Marxists’ who sought vindication for the exploitation of working people in the writings of Marx. But when Hobsbawm judges the impact of exploitative industrialism on working people in Britain and Russia, he inevitably reveals his moral schizophrenia. Therefore the exploitation of the British working class was inhuman and reprehensible; and the exploitation of the Russian working class was, accordingly, historically necessary and progressive. However, the contradictory evidence in Marx’s writings has served to strengthen the confusion amongst socialists in the West about the socialist attitude towards industrialisation in the developing world. Moreover, Marx himself was never really sure whether all revolts were progressive or useless by impeding more advanced regimes; and those who have followed him are often caught up in this duality, this contradiction.
In the West the majority of socialists, whether they belong to the authoritarian or the libertarian left, assume that industrialisation in the developing world will be both authoritarian and progressive. Thus the options are closed; the purpose of struggling against preordained ‘fate’ is questioned; and the juggernaut of modernisation beckons the pre-industrial labour force forward to new forms of social control. In contrast to EP Thompson’s early optimism about ‘winning causes’ in Asia or Africa ‘which were lost in England’, he has now opted for a less optimistic perspective. In a recent article he sounds a note of fatalism: ‘Without time-discipline we could not have the insistent energies of industrial man... whether this discipline comes in the form of Methodism, or of Stalinism, or of nationalism, it will come in the developing world.’ [25] If there were crucial differences between British and Russian industrialisation, then what is important for the developing world is whether the new work-discipline comes in a Methodist or a Stalinist form. This is what will determine the outcome  —  whether Asia and Africa will throw up Luddites or Stakhanovites, democratic labour movements or state-controlled labour movements, a totalitarian reality or a democratic utopia. In opposition to the interpreters of inexorable contemporary ‘reality’ in the developing world, the message of Leszek Kolakowski, the Polish philosopher, is still valid and relevant:
The only protest of the utopian against social reality is that it is morally wrong; his only instrument for influencing the course of social reality is to tell people how the world should look to fulfil those criteria of absolute good and evil...
Between obedience to the world of reality and obedience to the moral imperative, an abyss gapes on whose brink the great historical tragedies have been played: the tragedies of conspiratorial insurrections predesigned to disaster and the opposite kind of tragedies, of collaboration with crime as a result of the belief in its inevitability. On both these brinks, the moral history of the revolutionary movement of recent years has also been staged.

Notes
1. SB Clough and CW Cole, Economic History of Europe (Boston, 1952), p 153.
2. EP Thompson, The Making of the English Working Class (London, 1963), p 433.
3. A Alan Maclaren, ‘Presbyterianism and the Working Class in a Mid-Nineteenth-Century City’, Scottish Historical Review, Volume 46, 1967, pp 115-39.
4. Raymond Postgate, The Builders’ History (London, 1923), p 18.
5. Walter Laqueur, The Fate of the Revolution (London, 1967), p 186.
6. Tony Cliff, Stalinist Russia: A Marxist Analysis (London, 1955), pp 222-52.
7. Bertram D Wolfe, Marxism: 100 Years in the Life of a Doctrine (London, 1967), p 346.
8. EP Thompson, ‘The Peculiarities of the English’, Socialist Register 1965 (London, 1965), p 356.
9. EP Thompson, The Making of the English Working Class (London, 1963), p 421.
10. Victor G Kiernan, ‘Notes on Marxism in 1968’, Socialist Register 1968 (London, 1968), p 206.
11. Victor G Kiernan, ‘Notes on Marxism in 1968’, Socialist Register 1968 (London, 1968), p 207.
12. GV Rimlinger, ‘Autocracy and the Early Russian Factory System’, Journal of Economic History, Volume 20, 1960, pp 72-79.
13. Lionel Kochan, Russia in Revolution 1890-1918 (London, 1967), p 52.
14. Theodore H Von Laue, ‘Russian Peasants in the Factory 1892-1904’, Journal of Economic History, Volume 21, 1961, p 80.
15. Raymond Aron, 18 Lectures on Industrial Society (London, 1967), p 5.
16. Alexander Gerschenkron, Economic Backwardness in Historical Perspective (New York, 1965), p 49.
17. Leon Trotsky, The History of the Russian Revolution (New York, 1959), p 32.
18. Alexander Gerschenkron, Economic Backwardness in Historical Perspective (New York, 1965), p 141.
19. Karl Marx, Capital (London, 1949), p 564.
20. Hans Gerth and C Wright Mills, Character and Social Structure (London, 1965), pp 475-76, my emphasis.
21. Lewis Coser and Irving Howe, ‘Authoritarians of the “Left"’, Voices of Dissent (New York, 1958), p 96.
22. Alexander Gerschenkron, Economic Backwardness in Historical Perspective (New York, 1965), p 2, my emphasis.
23. Ota Sik, ‘Socialist Market Relations and Planning’, in CH Feinstein (ed), Socialism, Capitalism and Economic Growth: Essays Presented To Maurice Dobb (London, 1967), p 139, emphasis in original. My critical remarks on Ota Sik’s writings do not detract from my unconditional support for the revisionists in Czechoslovakia.
24. Karl Marx, Pre-Capitalist Economic Formations: With an Introduction by Eric J Hobsbawm (London, 1964), p 50.
25. EP Thompson, ‘Time, Work-Discipline and Industrial Capitalism’, Past and Present, no 38, 1967. On the general problems of historical determinism versus human agency in relation to the role of the labour movement in industrial societies, see my review article, ‘A Survey of Some Recent Literature on the Labour Movement’, Political Quarterly, Volume 39, no 2, 1968, pp. 205-15.
 


James D Young Archive




cher’s Trotsky by James D. Young 1964


James D Young 1964
Deutscher’s Trotsky
Source: Political Quarterly, Volume 35, no 2, April-June 1964. Scanned and prepared for the Marxist Internet Archive by Paul Flewers.
Isaac Deutscher, The Prophet Outcast: Trotsky 1929-40 (Oxford University Press, pp 543
The Essential Trotsky (Unwin Books), pp 251
The Prophet Outcast is the third and final instalment of Isaac Deutscher’s monumental biography of Leon Trotsky. Isaac Deutscher has taken a whole decade to complete this trilogy, and the result is a major biography in the tradition of bourgeois scholarship. In the Marxist sense, however, he is a brilliant chronicler rather than a major theoretician. Notwithstanding his great literary gifts, wide erudition and considerable partisan political experience as a Trotskyite fellow-traveller, Isaac Deutscher unwittingly betrays his theoretical inadequacy by persistently excusing his hero’s false prophecies and faults as ‘the faults of someone who was steeped in the traditions of “classical Marxism"’.
Being a prisoner of the classical Marxism he lauds in Leon Trotsky, he is simply incapable of bringing Marxism abreast of the contemporary scene. So, when he tries to vindicate the ‘people’s democracies’ in Eastern Europe by evoking classical Marxism, he flounders, pontificates and painfully shows up his theoretical dependence on Leon Trotsky’s now shattered and bankrupt concept of the ‘degenerated workers’ state’.
It seems to me that, though Isaac Deutscher places himself in the tradition of Marxist historical scholarship, the final volume of the biography of Trotsky lacks the scrutiny, independence and analytical brilliance that shines through Franz Mehring’s classic biography of Karl Marx or his historical study, The Lessing Legend. But then Franz Mehring was a major theoretician as well as an historian, and not just a brilliant chronicler.
Nevertheless, there is in Deutscher’s book the human interest of the story of a man who was hounded and exiled, and in quick succession expelled from Prinkipo, France, Norway and almost Mexico  –  only to end up as the victim of an assassin’s axe, yet all the time proudly and heroically struggling to uphold the truth as he understood it. To crown and lend authenticity to the story of an already overcrowded drama, Isaac Deutscher was given privileged access to the private correspondence and closed archives at Harvard University, and one can easily discern the enchantment mingled with the pathos and the tragedy revealed by the correspondence of the founder of the Red Army with his relatives and followers in ‘Soviet’ Russia.
The traditional Marxist concept that the ‘statification of industry equals socialism’ is the leitmotif of Deutscher’s biography, and he vividly chronicles ‘the prophet’s’ fidelity to the canons of classical Marxism throughout the turmoil and upheaval of the 1930s. That was the source of his undoing. For Trotsky, as Isaac Deutscher half admits, clung to the by then historically outmoded dogmas of classical Marxism, and by doing so he did untold damage to the ‘image’ and very concept of what socialism is.
But why was a revolutionary of the heroic stature and reputation of Leon Trotsky so afraid of ‘revisionism'? Perhaps it had something to do with his own past as a critic and belated adherent to Bolshevism. In 1914 he had, after all, written a brilliant and acid polemic against the Bolsheviks, saying: ‘Bolshevism may very well be an excellent instrument for the conquest of power, but after that it will reveal its counter-revolutionary aspects.’
By 1924 even Lenin was frightened by the bureaucratic machine he had created, and  –  on his death-bed  –  he set out to draft character analyses of ‘the committee men’. Anyway Trotsky’s ambiguity (almost, by the way, amounting to mysticism) about ‘the class nature of the Soviet state’ prevented him from providing the labour movement with the new political reorientation it so desperately needed  –  a new critique of modern industrial society. And that kept him from concretising the ‘permanent revolution’ he had dreamt and written of as a young man, and, moreover, undermined his herculean, permanent opposition and struggles against the more glaring aspects of Stalin’s totalitarianism.
During the raging controversy in the Fourth International in the late 1930s around the ‘state capitalist’ and ‘bureaucratic collectivist’ theories, ‘Trotsky asserted that whatever the resemblances between Hitler’s and Stalin’s methods of government, the economic and social differences were qualitative and not merely quantitative  –  this was the gulf between the regimes’. Karl Marx had, of course, written in his Critique of Political Economy that ‘the mode of production in material life determines the general character of the social, political and spiritual processes of life’. But within the framework of Marxist ‘dialects’ [1] Trotsky was able to write brilliant and fierce polemics against the bureaucratic totalitarian superstructure of Russian society and simultaneously insist that ‘Stalin alone exercised control over a truly post-capitalist order’.
In the final chapter of The Prophet Outcast, entitled ‘Victory in Defeat’, Isaac Deutscher argues that if Trotsky were alive today he would find no difficulty in recognising the ‘people’s democracies’ in Eastern Europe. But at the close of his days Leon Trotsky discussed the theoretical possibility of the working classes of Western Europe being incapable of seizing or holding political power, and he did so with his customary clarity and bluntness:
However onerous this... perspective may be, if the world proletariat should actually prove incapable of accomplishing its mission... nothing else would remain but to recognise openly that the socialist programme, based on the internal contradictions of capitalist society, had petered out as a Utopia. 
In that case, however, ‘he, at any rate, would be with Spartacus, not with Pompey and the Caesars’.
So alongside The Prophet Outcast I found The Essential Trotsky a disappointing footnote to a work which has taken Deutscher ten years of researching and writing. The Essential Trotsky consists of a dull, prosaic, and pedestrian introduction by RTC, and three booklets by Trotsky, ‘The October Revolution’, the ‘Lessons of October’, and ‘Stalin Falsifies History’. Nor does RTC inspire confidence in his scholarship. In the first footnote to his introduction, for example, he calls the second volume of Deutscher’s trilogy The Prophet Disarmed instead of The Prophet Unarmed. But any book which stimulates criticism and forces us to re-evaluate the contemporary significance of the Russian Revolution is to be wholeheartedly welcomed.
Notes
1. This should presumably read ‘dialectics’  –  MIA.
 


 James D. Young Archive




