

The Civilian and the Military,
by Arthur A. Ekirch.
Oxford University Press, New York. 1956. 339 pp. $6.50.
It is Mr. Ekirch’s thesis that, contrary to the traditional conception of the evolution of American democracy, we have actually been witnessing, since 1776, a gradual but steady deterioration of personal liberty in the United States.
And this is true, in his view, despite the unquestioned broadening of formal political democracy during the same period.
The present volume is a documentation of this thesis by way of a thorough, even elaborate, history of militarism and anti-militarism in the US.
From the very start of our history there was no fooling the American citizen about the true nature of this debate. In the persistent struggle around “standing army vs. militia,” Madison argued bitterly against a standing army and the inevitable officer caste as precursors of despotism! The widespread hostility to the reactionary Society of Cincinnati was grounded in a sophistication born of revolutionary experience.
Similarly, with the utmost care Ekirch reveals how clearly American democrats have always recognized the sham use of “preparedness” and other defensive slogans as excuses to press for military appropriations in preparation for aggressive war. The huge “defense” expenditures urged upon Congress by Alexander Hamilton, who hoped for a war against the French Revolution in the 1790s, find their direct successors today in “defense appropriations” aimed against modern revolutions. Similar cries for defensive armament were raised by the War Hawks prior to the aggressive War of 1812; in 1848, before the war against Mexico; and again just prior to the Spanish-American War.
After World War I, Wilson and his Assistant Secretary of the Navy, Franklin D. Roosevelt, leaders of the interventionist wing of US capitalism, pushed naval construction to a point greater than that of Japan and England combined – and this in a period when Japan alone tripled her naval forces. In 1935 Roosevelt, in the name of “defense,” again instituted a naval program greater than that of Japan and England combined.
It was the ingrained American hostility to and suspicion of a standing army that was responsible for the constitutional provision guaranteeing the right to bear arms, just as it sparked the ardent, long-successful emphasis on a voluntary state militia as the democratic alternative to a standing army. In fact it was not until 1903 that the federal government gained substantial control over the state militias. Until World War I, all wars, including the Civil War, were fought for the most part by individual volunteers and members of state militias. (States could and did withhold troops if they were ill-disposed to the military operation, as was the case in 1812 and 1848.)
Nor was awareness lacking among our ancestors of that primary use of armies – intervention in the domestic class struggle. In fact, this was probably the most important single source of opposition to a standing army in the early days, bearing in mind the popular Shay’s and Whiskey rebellions. That both the poor farmers and the urban-planter coalition were conscious of the class character of the army is more than amply documented.
Ekirch also demonstrates that from their earliest manifestations, in 1828, the political and economic labor movements were vigorous and articulate opponents of militarist proposals for the draft or other service, and opposed defense budgets, state or federal. Not until 1916 did they surrender their hitherto implacable opposition, when Gompers came out for Wilson’s “preparedness.” Today, in the author’s view, the decline in individual liberty due to the mounting role of the army in society (to mention only one area), is proceeding at a vastly accelerated tempo.
The new role of the United States as aspirant to total world power, the permanent war economy, the consequent increase in persecution of radicals and anti-militarists, are all of a piece to him.
Ekirch’s scrupulous scholarship, his determined effort to view American history within the framework of a meaningful, naturalistic pattern, command attention in a period such as ours, so rich, above all else, in pure apologetics.
 



I.
IT WOULD be a stale truism to say that the events in the colonial world of the past decade have not been integrated by any unified conception into the general framework of Marxist world revolutionary perspectives and theory. Three major problems arising from the past revolutionary decade of colonial wars are:


The nature of the state in China;
 
the relation between permanent revolution and the emergence of new bourgeois states in Asia;
 
the significance of the historically unique, developing economic structures of these new states as well as of other industrially backward areas.


It is as a contribution toward the formulation of a comprehensive Marxist conception of the worldwide colonial revolution – various in its forms, but all of them aspects of one socio-economic whole – that this presentation aims. Basic to our conception is the acceptance of an overall picture of the economy which, except as a series of isolated facts, has not been sufficiently appreciated in the movement’s analyses of the colonial world – specifically, the role of the bourgeois state in the economic process. A historical summary of the situation has not yet appeared in the Marxist press, and we must begin with this crucial feature.
 
India
The Indian nationalist movement has long recognized the indispensability of some measure of economic planning in their scheme for a new bourgeois India. In accordance with this view the famous Bombay Plan was issued in 1942. It is also known as the Tata Plan, because the main figures in its creation were a group of industrialists headed by Tata, the most important Indian industrial figure. The plan was essentially a detailed outline of a $33 billion investment program spread out over a period of three five-year plans, in which the government was to play an undefined, but central role. [1] This general orientation was confirmed in the government Resolution on Industrial Policy of April 6, 1948, which reserved for government investment the following industries: coal, iron, steel, aircraft, shipbuilding, communications equipment, railroads, oil. Existing properties in these fields were ultimately to be nationalized.
But the vast problems of organizing the new state compelled delay in the projection of a full-scale plan and the first five-year plan did not go into effect until 1952. Involved was a moderate goal of $4 billion new investment. Of this sum, roughly 10% was to take the form of industrial equipment, the remainder for power units, dams, irrigation, training, and agricultural reorganization. [2] (The seeming slight emphasis on factory construction and equipment is due to the immensely pressing and immediate crisis in agriculture.)
Of the new industrial plants, approximately half are expected to be built by private entrepreneurs. However the prospects of realizing these industrial goals cannot be discussed without consideration of the significant course of investment history in the postwar period. In the numerous previous partial efforts at government planning in investment, the share allocated to and expected of private capital has always fallen short of realization. Indeed, in the provisional projection of the most recent plan, on two occasions, revisions were made necessary, increasing the government share of projected investment at the expense of anticipated private. The growing lag in textile and other consumer goods allocated to the private sector supports the likelihood of unfulfillment of private responsibilities, and the consequent further disproportionality between the public and private sectors.
The entire history of investment and of the plan demonstrates incontestably that the Indian bourgeoisie “prefers” increasingly to restrict itself to light industry and commercial ventures. As a consequence, irrespective of formal policy decisions, the actual course of Indian economic development follows more and more that of a government-dominated economy. In attempting to fulfill the urgent needs of the economy, constant encroachments have brought government plans and realized investment into the following areas: fertilizers, chemicals, machine-tools, locomotive factory, instrument, cement, paper and pharmaceuticals. These are irt addition to those industries already preempted by law for the government.
Precisely what proportion of industry will be in government hands at the termination of the plan, is difficult to estimate, but plainly it is a rapidly growing proportion. And its future is equally plain from the knowledge that government investment in India will continue to be of the order of 75% of all capital investment, with the concomitant consequences of planning and state ownership.
As a result of the plan, it is estimated that output will increase as follows: coal 30% (35 million tons), steel 40% (1.5 million tons) and other industrial commodities an average of 100%. Despite this, no serious rise in consumption is to be expected, with the possible exception of food. The inflation of the past 12 years has driven real wages to below their pre-war level. Average per-capita cloth consumption has fallen from 16 yards to 13 yards; food consumption is only 92% of pre-war standards. [3] At the same time industrial production has risen considerably, particularly in producer goods. (Fuel-energy 180, cement 195, steel 170; 1939 equals 100.)
Expectations for the future as a result of the plan are for more of the same. Textile mills, for which a 40% rise over the plan had been projected, are in a slump in response to “necessary” continued low wages, while producer goods output has held up fairly well. The state intervention in capital accumulation seems therefore to be leading to nothing but a repetition of old bourgeois norms, i.e., the development of the means of production at the expense of the proletariat.
 
China Before the 1948 Revolution
The new phase of modern industrial history in China begins with the approximate unification of China by Chiang Kai-shek in the late 1920s. From the start, “peculiar” economic policies were projected. In 1928, Sun-Fo, the son of the founder of the Chinese Republic, was responsible for the projection of a long- and short-term plan for a $30 billion industrial development by state industry. The plan was quite utopian, but was followed at regular intervals by more modest plans in 1930 and 1932. [4] None of these were more than moderately successful. Several provinces, in the flush of national resurgence, produced their own plans. Kwangtung province had a three-year plan for a $100 million investment in basic industry (more than the total existing industrial capital in the province at the time) which was partially fulfilled. But continued internal instability, gross inexperience and vacillation conspired to reduce the plans to a level of secondary importance in terms of capital growth. Nevertheless, on a small scale, the state investment was never fully interrupted, and remained an indication of a hope and a policy, or, at the very least, a symptom of a struggle of policies. Doubtless one strong factor in this irresolution was the pressure of the comprador wing of the bourgeoisie, agents of western imperialism.
In 1935 the government role of industrial development was reorganized in its final form under the Natural Resources Commission, and was set off on a new three-year plan for a diversified industrial development including an additional steel capacity of 300,000 tons. [5] The outbreak of war with Japan in 1937 forced a reorganization of the Commission’s plans but from this time on it played the decisive role in China’s industrial growth.
The pressing need for industry during the war was met mainly by government funds and management. Between 1939-44, new investment in government industrial enterprises totaled 142 billion Chinese dollars. In the same period, private investment totalled 117 billion Chinese dollars, with much of this capital a government loan. [6]
In a policy statement of 1944, the government preempted for itself (the first halting gesture of its kind) all development in munitions (a vast all-inclusive segment of industry in a backward economy), power, mining, railroads, iron and steel, leaving the remaining sectors of the economy to private enterprise.
However at the close of the war the forces of experience and necessity compelled the government to a de facto violation of its own policy in dealing with the industry of the restored territories of Occupied China and Manchuria. This phase has been amply documented by Germain. [7] In addition to taking over all Japanese and collaborationist industry (the overwhelming part of Chinese modern industry) the government also established a monopoly in the merchant marine, the sugar industry of Formosa, and created a four billion Chinese dollars corporation for the further industrial development of Manchuria. [8] The end result of this process of appropriation was that fully 60% of China’s industrial capacity was nationalized.
One consequence of this lump-sum nationalization must not be ignored. Insofar as heavy industry was concerned, cutting off the source of experience and training for the classical bourgeoisie as well as the source of private capital accumulation, made it inevitable that the future development of industry would also proceed in the channel of state enterprise or not at all. It is this historically unique political economy to which the Chinese Communist Party fell heir upon coming to power.
But before proceeding to the policy of the new regime, it will be of interest to glance at the economic structure which the Kuomintang forces have created and maintained on their last retreat, Formosa. This island of eight million inhabitants has today, under Chiang Kai-shek, proportionately more statified economy than any area of the world outside the Soviet Union. The state has a practicing monopoly in the following industries: aluminum, cement, coal, fertilizer, gold and copper mines, shipbuilding, petroleum, electric power, pulp-paper works, steel works, machine manufacture, sugar mills, chemicals. It also operates nine textile mills with half the output of the island. In addition the state operates 186 sugar plantations covering half the total acreage in sugar and employing 200,000 laborers. [9] No, nationalist policy on planning of nationalization on the mainland of China was not a freak, but an inevitable bourgeois response in an all but impossible situation.
 
The New China
The participation in a real, not merely window-dressing role, of bourgeois groups in the revolutionary government, the theoretical declarations of the Chinese Communist Party on the relation between state and private capital (and the numerous supporting decrees), the actual protective course pursued by the CP during the agrarian revolution toward all non-land capital, have all been previously and amply documented, particularly in the work of Germain. Apart from the land question, the policy for industrial development of the CP is essentially a continuation of that of the previous regime!
Catapulted to power, the new government proceeded to nationalize the property of bureaucratic capital, i.e., those elements intimately tied to the Chiang regime who fled to Formosa. By 1952, 80% of all heavy industry was in government hands, and 30% of light industry. [10] But apart from these political expropriations, the situation was not changed qualitatively in comparison with the condition of state economy under Chiang. The state retains dominance in heavy industry (and must extend this); light industry and commercial capital remain largely in private hands. [11]
It is not, however, the strength of the classical bourgeoisie which is responsible for this reservation about private enterprise. The real limiting factors to fuller nationalization lie in the technical and administrative backwardness of the bureaucratic apparatus, and in the poverty of the economy, resulting in the enormous difficulty of integrating the public and private sectors of the economy, and in government control and planning in general. The recent five-anti’s and three-anti’s movements were a reflection of this problem, as is also the fact that these campaigns have not been followed by any tendency toward further expropriations among the numerous investigated private firms.
As in the other Asiatic states, the policy of the Mao regime toward foreign capital is not a hostile one. Not only is domestic capital protected, but foreign as well. [12] An exception to this policy may have been made in regard to American properties, as a response to the refusal of the US government to release Chinese funds in American banks to the new regime. There is no reason to believe that the government would not welcome and encourage foreign investment, on policy considerations. The $50 million annual capital loan from Russia is an insignificant amount for China’s immediate needs and capacity to absorb capital, and even runs a poor second to US loans and grants to India, which are approximately double this amount.
As to current and future capital accumulation in China, its distribution between the public and private sectors, no significant data is yet available; consequently it has been impossible to determine the actual source of the capital or to compare the rate of development with that of India. However, if one is to be at all guided by government policy statements, it seems likely that it is the area of government heavy industry and development which will continue to absorb the predominant share of new capital in China.
 
Indonesia
The Dutch government of pre-war days pursued a policy in Indonesia somewhat distinct from that of the other imperialists in Asia in several significant aspects. An outstanding example was the fact that no non-Indonesian could own agricultural land. The large estates for industrial agriculture could only be on leased land, and for the most part, land not previously cultivated (hence the concentration of estates in thinly populated Sumatra). To this policy was due the unusual degree of survival in Indonesia of ancient communal land distribution and the relatively low concentration of land ownership.
But paralleling this attempt to preserve some aspects of the pre-Dutch economy, was the failure of Indonesia, perhaps more than any other Asiatic colony, to develop its own bourgeois class. The role of this class – to supplement the western bourgeoisie in the exploitation and development of the country – tell to the Chinese immigrant (commercial investment) and to the state. Consequently, even in the pre-war period the government owned two-thirds of the railroads, all telephone and telegraph, 60% of electric power, 75% of coal output, 60% of the tin mines (and five-eighths interest in the rest).
At the conclusion of the struggle for independence a policy of industrial development was accepted universally, and all major parties claimed to aim at a socialist commonwealth. The constitution (Article 38) states, “The national economy shall be organized on a cooperative basis.” But in the short run, the ruling groups agreed that this would preclude expropriation of foreign properties due to the great capital shortage and the need for foreign help.
In 1950, the first industrialization plan was proposed, the Sumitro plan, oriented about the construction of relatively small plants, complementary to the basic agricultural products of the islands (wood-pulp and paper, rubber milling, tiles, plywood, spinning and knitting mills, jute bag plants, cement, saw mills, chemicals, aluminum plants, fertilizer, glass, scrap reduction plants. Unlike India, however, there was almost no counterpart private investment to supplement development. Private capitalism restricts itself to commerce despite generous government offers of loans, so that in industrialization the field is yielded almost entirely to the state. The only other source of growth has lain in the field of industrial cooperatives, which, facilitated by strong communal tradition and government policy, now number 1,500, employing 218,000 workers. [13] These exist mainly in handicrafts.
But it is not only native capital that is not forthcoming. The huge foreign-owned investments, while guaranteed by the state, are no longer the viable economic units they once were. (The very obviously unfinished state of the revolution in Indonesia in the city as well as on the land has resulted in paralysis and even some exodus of private foreign investment.)
The major capital holdings, those in industrial agriculture, are hard hit by a dual problem, the general hostility to foreign capital and the growing food crisis. During the war, the Japanese, unable to use all the products of Indonesia’s vast industrial agriculture, acquiesced in the return of land to food production to meet the growing shortages. As a result many estates (particularly in Sumatra) were divided by the peasants into small holdings. Thus far it has proved impossible to reconstruct these estates, and the attempts to do so are partly responsible for the Darul Islam movement. Naturally this does not serve to encourage further private investment, though the capital shortage is very severe. One consequence is that even in estate agriculture the state has been largely responsible for the necessary reconstruction. But to this day, the real and incipient war in the countryside is such that even at the peak prices and demand of 1951 (Korean war stockpiling), the production of raw material for export was only 60–80% of 1938. [14]
 
Burma
In Burma we find a territory in much the same position as Indonesia, yet meriting distinct treatment for the unusual political features of the regime. Here too we find an insignificant native bourgeoisie, whose role is usurped by British and even Indian capital. Burmese industrial capital is almost confined to the smaller rice mills.
After independence was attained under the leadership of the Socialist Party, a Constitution and policy were promulgated much more specifically “socialist” than in any other state in Asia. Under the Land Nationalization Act (Nov. 4, 1948), land was nationalized, and individual holdings limited to a maximum of 50 acres, except for producers cooperatives. Also nationalized were all rice mills (an industry employing half the industrial labor force of the country), as well as the distribution and sale of rice. Under Articles 44 and 219 of the Constitution, state enterprises were to have a monopoly in arms, railroads, power, communication, chemicals, iron-steel, extractive industries.
As usual in these cases, the state in practice was forced beyond even these industries into almost every field. Thus river transportation has been nationalized, and government plants were constructed in textile, glass, salt mines, cement, paper, fertilizer, jute bags.
In 1950, a development plan was introduced covering 1951–59, and involving $1.5 billion. It is difficult to determine to what degree this is being realized. But it is quite plain that private domestic capital is playing practically no role, remaining restricted in practice to commerce.
The predominant role of the state in investment and production is not altered qualitatively by the fact that foreign capital still retains some hold in the country. The vast capital requirement for reconstruction of the oil industry has discouraged the government from nationalizing it to date on the premise that only foreign capitalists could supply the needed resources. The policy is, in fact, one of encouraging more private foreign capitalism, but so far very little has been forthcoming, due no doubt to the overall industrial policy of the regime and the persisting revolutionary situation.

II.
It is, and indeed should be, a genuine source of theoretical concern, to find this formation of similar economic structures developing within a group of countries encompassing the widest range of seemingly divergent political superstructures – the Formosa and China of Chiang Kai-shek and of Mao Tse-tung, so-called socialist Burma and overtly bourgeois India. It is possible, however, to demonstrate that these superficially diverse states are really but different manifestations of a common social necessity in much the same sense that it was possible to understand Hitler Germany, Social Democratic Sweden, and pre-war Japan all as expressions of bourgeois society, despite their certainly non-classical character. The full concrete reality, the diversity in appearance, can, of course, be understood only by an analysis of the general socio-economic problems facing this group of countries, the manner of attempted resolution of these problems, and the specific historical circumstances in which the attempt was made.
 
The Economics of Statification
There is an extensive Marxist literature on the subject of the role of imperialism in impeding the industrial development of the colonial areas. Three major factors seem to be responsible for this, and they need only be mentioned here.


Certain industries were not permitted for competitive reasons.
 
The most profitable industries (extractive) were reserved for European capital, depriving the home economy of a great source of ready capital accumulation.
 
The political necessity of preserving power imposed a policy of encouraging “feudal” social relations and repressing the dynamic potentialities of urban-industrial development.


Valid as this analysis is, it is certainly inadequate, being incapable of explaining the failure of independent semi-colonial countries to mature industrially (pre-war Eastern Europe, South America). The significance of the analysis rests essentially upon the relationship it bears to that central organizing principle, the problem of capital accumulation and investment. Within this framework we can recognize that there are other equally important problems on the road to capital accumulation, and that the traditional analysis is therefore incomplete.
The forced involvement of the Asiatic countries in the world market imposed upon them for the first time the revolutionizing tasks of capital creation. We are accustomed to speak summarily of the backwardness of pre-revolutionary Russia, and of the overriding significance of this condition. How much more so this is true of Asia is rendered graphically clear by one simple index. In 1913, Russia had a steel capacity which, in per capita terms, was more than ten times that of India or China in 1950 – 4.2 million tons vs. approximately one million tons.
This imperative necessity to accumulate is buttressed by the fact, which history so amply demonstrates, that failure to do so yields not stagnation, but relative and absolute decline! The overwhelming necessity and the method by which it is attacked, determine the character of all policy; and it is this common situation and method that impose their stamp upon seemingly diverse regimes. Above all stands the tremendous contrast between the indispensable minimum capital requirements (determined by political as well as economic pressures) and the quantities realizable under given social relations.
In advanced countries, the problem of capital accumulation is comparatively simple. Our whole economy, way of life, is geared above all else to this one demand. So much so that we forget that to a feudal or agrarian society, capital accumulation is almost incomprehensible. Such societies are geared about wealth production, not capital formation. The transformation in Europe from the feudal to the bourgeois conception of wealth took centuries.
Asia, an agrarian society, is to this very day still essentially wealth and not capital oriented. Surpluses are not invested, but rather kept in hoards of bullion, luxury goods, or sent abroad. In the more “dynamic” sectors, wealth can be invested in trade, speculation, but only rarely in genuine capital construction. Due to the late arrival of capital accumulation, the incipient bourgeoisie is faced simultaneously with the historically most mature impediment – revolutionary class struggle.
Capital scarcity is, of course, a relative conception. Asia has been sufficiently shaken by the impact of industrialism to make it likely that if these nations could be isolated from the world market, capitalism would slowly but surely grow, much as it did in Europe in the late middle ages. But the concretely overwhelming links to the world market pose a problem which Europe (outside Russia) never had to face regarding the rate of capital accumulation. The nature of capitalism, and of the market, demands that as each country enters the sphere of capitalist production it must do so at the highest level reached by industrial civilization up to that point. Nothing short of this level will do if the economy entertains serious perspectives; any lower level can lead only to stagnation. This is, of course, “old hat.” But to say that Asia enters industrial society in the period of the emergence of atomic energy is to dramatize, without departing one iota from reality, the enormous leap that must be taken. The law of combined development takes the stage with a vengeance.
Perhaps some explication of the meaning of catching up today may not be superfluous. Industrialization involves more than the use of the latest technical apparatus. The scale of operations of modern industry is such that the unit of capital expenditure in under-developed areas is not the plant, but a coordinated group of industries. Thus setting up one modern steel mill in India would mean a minimum increase of 25–50% in her steel capacity. A change in output of such scope could not be met by a mere internal expansion of all the industries and services related to steel. Instead one would simultaneously have to open up new coal and iron mines, quite possibly new railroads, electric power units, schools for training labor, perhaps new cities and certainly additional steel fabricating plants to absorb the qualitatively new steel capacity. [15]
To all this, one must add the revolution in culture involved in the overnight creation of a labor force for modern industry. Students of the history of the creation of the contemporary Soviet labor force will not be prone to underestimate the magnitude of this aspect of industrial revolution. Under these circumstances, the development of Asia by capitalist means can only be achieved under conditions socially tumultuous and unbelievably costly in human terms.
Under such conditions it becomes equally clear that the demands of accumulation involve the utter inadequacy of classical techniques of accumulation: i.e., that only the state can now perform that historic function of the capitalist on the requisite scale. This new function of the state and the new demands upon the scope of investment predicate a leap from the most primitive forms of capitalist organization to that of the most advanced (in principle), namely, state planned economy.
Planning per se is of course not always a substitute for the rigors of capital accumulation; it can, and does, as easily provide the weapon for the most absolute, most thorough exploitation known to man. For, indeed, it is only via the state that the most concentrated techniques of accumulation (in its two-fold aspect) can be introduced in contemporary society – -the repression of the proletariat, and the most efficient tapping of the incomes of every segment of the population, by taxation or other methods of “forced saving.”
Where this development proved impossible, or delayed, as in pre-war colonial areas under direct imperialist domination, it is hardly surprising to find that, historically, the emergence of a bourgeoisie in the classical form was of necessity art abortive one. The best that these economies were able to manage up to now was a bastard development, the comprador capitalist, so prominent throughout the colonial world, the marginal entrepreneur who lives in and through the limited industrialization carried out by the imperialists.
The logic of the condition in which they find themselves has not been lost upon the more dynamic, non-feudal elements in colonial societies, and is now almost universally accepted. This appreciation has been greatly facilitated in Asia by several historical factors whose impact is quite well-known.


The powerful strain of communalism that persists throughout Asia in the form of clan and family rights and obligations taking precedence over individuals. The ideology of cooperation and group priority remains a powerful barrier against bourgeois-individualism. (Communal property is still quite common in Java, India, and China.)
 
The ready consistency of communalism and state organization of economy with the objective needs of the time.
 
The hostility toward colonial imperialism is easily and naturally extended to include a hostility to its ideology and social organization.
 
The crisis of capitalist economy and ideology since 1914, which is especially obvious to outsiders.
 


The Politics of Statification
“The nationalization of railroads and oil fields in Mexico has of course nothing in common with socialism. It is a measure of state capitalism in a backward country which in this way seeks to defend itself on the one hand against foreign imperialism and on the other hand against its own proletariat.” [16] (My emphasis. – D.M.)
With this penetrating analysis of a concrete instance of nationalization (and under trade union management!) Trotsky presents us with the political necessity for the new role of the state. So perpetual, so all-embracing is the crisis of the colonial areas of the world, that the preservation of bourgeois society demands that the state take direct charge, in one final decisive effort at disciplining the revolution and the new additional revolutionary impulses which efforts at industrialization must unleash.
The major source of the vast revolutionary mass movement which has swept the entire colonial world is the unchecked decay of Asiatic economy during the past hundred years, and particularly during the recent period of western decline. The destruction of a vast class of artisans and small-scale industry by the intrusion of the world market compelled a mass retreat to the soil, involving the destruction of a tenuous balance between city and farm, between production and population, that had been preserved for centuries in the stagnant but not declining economies of the pre-capitalist states. As a consequence, per capita output in agriculture began an uninterrupted decline; because of surplus labor, farms were broken into even smaller less economic units, and the entire economy” took a nosedive. Within the past 15 years alone, India has suffered a 10% decline in per capita food consumption. In Java (an area of few estates) 96% of all arable soil was under cultivation in 1936, yet population Was increasing at the rate of 1½% per annum. Throughout the area, urban life on the whole was in relative decline. Every stratum of the population writhed under this impossible restriction of life!
But if to this improverishment and decay we add the prospect, the daily image, of a better way posed by the very existence of imperialists, their technology, the slight industrialization and the dribble of their goods into the economy – i.e., the vision of abundance – then every degree of decline necessarily propels the revolution forward. A seemingly exaggerated, yet an important pure case of this phenomenon, the contradiction between declining reality and rising expectations and demands, was given us by a movement among New Guinea laborers upon the final withdrawal of American troops in 1946. The return of the Australians, and their lower wage policy for natives, caused a strike among these sons of headhunters for a 4,800% increase in wages and an American diet!
The attempt to resolve these vital problems of the economy by intensified industrialization requires statification of production for reasons beyond the economic indispensability of planned integrated development. The unbelievable capital poverty of these states imposes upon them a program of capital accumulation which, under bourgeois conditions, can only be realized by the most barbarous direct exploitation of the proletariat precisely at a time when its expectations and demands for improved circumstances are at a new peak.
Thus pressed by economic and political necessity – the attempt to meet the revolution, to master it, to develop the economy and thus meet the urgent revolutionary demand for production – the situation is approachable for a bourgeois resolution only through some variant of state-dominated economy. And now, in the fullest sense of the word, the state in all its functions and fullest potentialities is revealed beyond disguise as the executive committee of the capitalist class – the state as the “personification of capital.”
 
The Historical Circumstances
The abstract realization that a social system is at an impasse, and the availability of a “solution” (in this case statification of production), does not guarantee that the society will be able to muster the resources for the requisite effort. For example, the urgent necessity of economic and political unity of Europe is quite clear to everyone in Europe, even to most sections of the bourgeoisie. Despite this, to all appearances the decay is so deep that bourgeois Europe seems quite unable to consummate even this secondary effort. So in the colonial countries, understanding is not invariably followed by action. Here politics, history play their role.
The traditional response of the colonial bourgeoisie to revolutionary anti-imperialism was governed by fear of the permanent revolution, the fear that once the masses entered the scene and expelled imperialism, they would move on to the destruction of bourgeois society itself. The need of the native bourgeoisie for national independence and the elimination of the feudal elements in society was therefore met by only half-hearted, com-promisist attempts, with which the history of the inter-war period is replete.
And this remained the perspective of the native bourgeoisie until devious history demonstrated that in conditions of great revolutionary upsurge and weakened imperialism, the revolutionary masses could no longer be suppressed, contained, and that the only slight remaining chance for both domestic and foreign capital lay in the surrender of political power by imperialism and its assumption by the native bourgeois classes, or in most cases, by its “socialist” representatives.
The revolutionary history of Asia over the past decade is actually not too well known. It is very sparsely documented. Our analysis is therefore of necessity sketchy. But the main outlines of some of the processes are reasonably distinct.
 
Burma
Even before World War II broke out, sections of the nationalist movement, including the Socialist Thakin movement, had established close ties with the Japanese government, which promised to supply funds, arms and military training to the anti-British movement. These promises were only partially fulfilled, but one of the Burmese who received military training in Japan was Aung San, the future leader of Burma. [17] Under such circumstances it is hardly surprising that the outbreak of war in 1941 was greeted as the first step toward Burmese independence (an illusion widely shared throughout Asia) and led to the immediate formation of the Burmese Independence Army (BIA) which helped in the defeat of the British in Burma.
Though hardly an independent regime, the Japanese did institute a government in Burma with far more power and participation for the Burmese than the British had ever granted. Burmese were appointed to all government positions, internal authority was extensive, and the BIA was maintained as a sizable armed force. Plainly, these were the minimal concessions consistent with maintaining order; i.e., preventing revolution. The vast territory to be administered, the awakened, confident, militant nationalist movement made a deal with the native ruling class absolutely necessary – risky though it was.
But these concessions were not sufficient to counterbalance the demand for full independence, or to compensate for the enormous demands which the Japanese began to make upon the conquered areas. Interrupted communications, general industrial shortages, the need for defense works, compelled the Japanese to forced requisitioning of labor and supplies which were far beyond the capacity of the economy. The net result was that a raging inflation set in by 1943.
When indications arose that the war was turning against the Japanese, the desperate occupying power could only attempt to halt the rising tide of hostility by declaring Burma independent in August 1943. In what must have been an astonishing response, the declaration was the signal for the outbreak of a vast peasant war against the Indian land-owning class. Fleeing to Rangoon, the landlords received asylum, but neither the Japanese nor the Burmese regime dared to intervene to protect their property rights. [18]
The growing economic crisis, the growing certainty of Japan’s defeat, caused a split in the nationalist movement, and, led by a cabinet minister of the government, Aung San, the anti-Japanese movement was organized as the Anti-Fascist Peoples’ Freedom League (AFPFL). Like the Chinese revolution, the mass base of this movement, and of its largest component party, the Socialist Party, lay in the peasant associations which had arisen during the land seizure of 1943, and which were apparently led by socialists. For the AFPFL, the road to independence lay not in opposition to both imperialist camps. This would have been much too “impractical.” Above all, the first maxim of opportunist and bourgeois politics is “Alone with the masses? Never!” Instead it proposed to achieve Burmese independence by aiding the British in their reconquest of Burma in 1945.
It must be confessed that the documented role of the proletariat in the period under consideration is obscure. The primitive, tiny Burmese working class (only 100,000 in modern-type industry) did not have its first experience as a class until 1938-39, which marked the real beginning of the Burmese Union movement and its first significant strikes. But these strikes were already semi-political. The year 1941 witnessed a second, broader wave of strikes and efforts at the organization of an All-Burma Federation just six months before the war. Here information of independent class action ceases until September 1946, when the first general strike in Burmese history took place, with a dual aim – wage increases from the predominantly foreign capital, and a demonstration for immediate independence. The unions were led largely by elements in the AFPFL, but to the left of the dominant Aung San Socialist Party.
Marxist surmisal would be that this perilous general strike played no small role in convincing the British of the necessity to grant the Burmese demand for independence (negotiations were then in progress) and thus hand over the power to a native class of urban petty-bourgeois elements linked with the new small-peasant landholders.
 
Indonesia
To a startling degree, events in Indonesia followed closely the pattern of Burmese developments. Here too the nationalist movement accepted the Japanese, and held considerable power under it, including a military force. Under influences and pressures similar to those in Burma, but more intense (1,000,000 laborers deported from Java alone, food consumption down by 25%), a pro-Allied wing soon split off, entering into moderate opposition to the Japanese-dominated regime, but without reaching the success of the AFPFL. As in India and Burma, the two wings of the nationalist movement were not hostile to one another – neither Soekarno nor Bose was considered a Quisling – but rather considered one another hedges against the victory of either imperialist group.
Imminent defeat, the desperate search for allies, the rising wall of hostility, prompted the Japanese to offer the Indonesians independence, and on August 17, 1945, the Japanese-sponsored “Committee for the Preparation of Independence” proclaimed the Indonesian Republic. It was to be three years before the Dutch could bring themselves to realise that the revolution was irreversible.
As in Burma, the role of the proletariat as a class in these events is still obscure in terms of available information. If one includes the proletariat on the plantations, i.e., industrial agriculture, then the industrial proletariat numbers no less than 1½ million workers in modern industry. But the pre-war repressions of the Dutch were if anything even more severe than those of the British; trade union membership in the Indies never reached above 90,000, of which many were European white-collar workers. During the 1930s, the peak strike year recorded 42 strikes involving a total of 2,115 workers. The precise form in which the working class participated in the booming revolutionary movement which followed the Japanese invasion, is difficult to determine in view of the complete absence of any detailed history of this period. Undoubtedly, the economic and political crisis, the reflected revolutionary movement, assumed some independent working class forms such as unions. Very possibly on the plantations the revolutionary organizations and the class organizations were often synonymous; but, either during or immediately after the declaration of independence, the movement reorganized itself on distinct class lines, and a period of intense class struggle ensued – a struggle which is today, and has been since the very birth of the republic, the primary immediate problem facing the new regime. Today, probably 80% of the proletariat is in the union movement.
We have already referred to the division of many large European estates during the war and the refusal of peasants to relinquish the land which is so desperately needed for food production. The war against the Dutch extended this incipient peasant war, directed it now against the relatively powerful feudal landlords in Sumatra (the remaining stronghold of feudal property). Considerable land redistribution was effected in this manner.
* * *
In these two developments it is abundantly clear that:


faced with a movement which had already experienced a considerable measure of independence, and had already organized a state and an armed force, to have refused recognition of independence would only have resulted in pushing the revolution to the left;
 
the experiences during the war precluded any possibility of profitable exploitation in the old way by imperialism; and
 
any effort to do so could only result in the situation we saw in Indochina, i.e., one that drained the life-blood of both contending parties. (It is notable that after eight years of war, the French cannot attain more than a toe-hold even in the ruling native class! Even the Assembly, hand-picked from the most reactionary wing of the Indo-Chinese bourgeois-feudal class, demanded an end to the French union, and recognized that without independence, all is lost for themselves and the French.)


It is in this matrix of economic, political and historic events and conditions, that the colonal revolutions of the past decade, and the economic statism which characterized them, become a comprehensive unity and reality.

Footnotes
1. Far East Survey, 1945, p. 137.
2. Eastern Economist, Mar. 6, 1953.
3. Report on the Indian Economy, Pacific Affairs, 1949.
4. H.D. Fong, Toward Economic Control in China.
5. C.Y.W. Meng, Survey of China’s Industrial Development, China Monthly, June–July 1946.
6. Ibid.
7. Fourth International, Nov.–Dec. 1950
8. Far East Survey, 1946, p. 296.
9. Report of the National Resources Commission, Taiwan, 1951.
10. China Reconstructs, Jan.–Feb. 1953.
11. In terms of employment and resources used, the specific weight of light industry is much greater in backward areas than in developed economies. Thus, for example, in one industry which remains in a semi-handicraft stage, paper manufacture, in Chekiang province alone in 1929, in 24,000 mills employing 125,000 workers, capital investment in each mill ranged from $1,415 to $14 and the number of workers varied from 17 to 2. Outside of textile goods, most mass consumption goods are produced under such conditions (pottery, bricks, flour, oil, wine, lanterns, etc.).
12. Open Letter of Peng Shu-tze, The Militant, Nov. 2, 1953.
13. US Information Office, Republic of Indonesia, Report on Indonesia, Oct. 1, 1952.
14. Ibid.
15. This disproportion arises occasionally even in the economy of advanced countries, and is to some extent the case with some recent gigantic investments in Canada.
16. Leon Trotsky, Trade Unions in the Epoch of Imperialist Decay.
17. Thein Pe, What Happened in Burma.
18. V. Thompson, Labor Problems in South East Asia.
 



The Causes of World War Three
by C. Wright Mills
Simon and Schuster, New York. 1958. 172 pp. $1.50.
It may not be news, but at least it takes guts for a teacher to proclaim, in print, that the American people are being dragooned into war by forces inherent in the capitalist structure of our society. For this is the central point of this recent book by the gifted author of The Power Elite and many other volumes of analysis and criticism.
Unlike those earlier books which brought him fame, this is not an academic work but rather an eloquent, impassioned plea to intellectuals in America to recognize the mortal crisis of society today and to do their duty, namely, to formulate a comprehensive program for meeting the ever-present threat of war.
Mills begins by tracing the incompetence and impotence of the capitalist class in the face of the great problems of the day (war, and the industrialization of the underdeveloped areas of the world) to their source in imperialism (the need for markets, investments abroad, and armament spending to prevent depression). If this is so, reasons Mills, then the reactionary policy of the power elite is not due to stupidity. A reversal of line can only be achieved if it is at the same time a struggle against capitalism.
“We can not, I believe, struggle for peace as we might struggle for this or for that particular reform ... Our struggle for peace must at the same time be a struggle to develop and to acquire access to the means for our struggle. Our immediate and continuous fight, in short, must be a fight inside the US power system over who is going to determine the uses of this nation’s fabulous means of power and over the reshaping of these means into more democratically responsible instruments. A real attack on war-making by Americans today is necessarily an attack upon the private incorporation of the economy.”
It is in this context that Mills’ concrete peace program must be viewed. Despite a flair for dramatic formulations, there is little new in them. Essentially they call for coexistence; that is, negotiations, an end to atomic weapons, extensive aid to the backward areas under UN control, and the like. The uniqueness of the approach lies in the belief that this program can only be realized through a drastic change in the power relationships within the country. It is this aspect of his program which distinguishes him from the liberal and Stalinist conceptions. Questionable as some of his proposals may be in the abstract (for example, the suggestion that the Mideast oil be pooled, operated by a UN agency, with all profits to go to the Arabs), they become less objectionable when taken in the context of a United States and a United Nations so changed as to have become anti-capitalist – the opposite of what they are today.
Mills’ version of the coexistence thesis should be a focus for much debate among opponents of the cold war.
Revolutionary socialists have opposed the policy which the Kremlin calls “peaceful coexistence” because it really concerns a proposed agreement with the imperialist powers to freeze the status quo at the expense of the popular aspirations on all continents for freedom, independence and socialism. Mills seeks to meet this objection by linking his coexistence proposals to class-struggle domestic policies. They have the further striking advantage of all positive formulations, appealing in the most forthright and most easily comprehensible manner to those who simply and directly demand of the American government that it refrain from its war-like posture.
There are two regrettable, though subordinate aspects of the analysis which merit mention. In view of Mills’ profound understanding of the interdependence of peace and social change, this reader was disappointed to find only the most cursory reference on how to advance the struggle against capitalism. Nor is there any explicit reference to the socialist alternative to capitalism which Mills doubtless believes in. These omissions seem rather awkward, and even compromising.
Secondly, it is disappointing to find Mills persist here, as in previous works, in misrepresenting the socialist theory of social change, and in particular, the theory of the state. In practice, his own work is fully socialist in its conclusions. For example, his observation, “The state in which we live, in its personnel and in its persistent outlook, does indeed appear at times as a committee of the ruling circles of corporation and high military,” lies at the core of his entire argument. This is certainly the central premise of socialist politics as well. Yet he cannot refrain from imputing to Marxists a mechanistic determinism in which history is reduced to fate. This injustice is all the more deplorable at the hands of a man of intellect and courage, and a friend of the working class.
 



The Public Philosophy
by Walter Lippmann
Little, Brown & Co., Boston. 185 pp. 1955. $3.50.
The Public Philosophy is a slim volume of political intellection of exceptional symptomatic significance for our time. Lippmann is distinguished from the vast majority of his journalistic colleagues by a candor, education, and sophistication which place him clearly in a class of one. This is a political, who, in defense of Eisenhower’s role in organizing the proposed European Army, could speak freely of the fact that the real function of that army is not an impossible and improbable defense against the Russians, but a defense against “internal disorders.”
In this, his latest work, Lippmann once again displays has statesmanship in his very point of departure. The major premise of his argument here is the overriding organic crisis of modern western society. For a leading American publicist, this is indeed an extraordinary confession.
The origin of this crisis, its diagnosis and his prescription can be briefly summarized, according to Lippmann, through its two roots: universal suffrage, and the dominant Utopian conception of the perfectibility of man and of his lot on earth.
Ever since universal suffrage emerged, parliamentary democracy has been rendered impotent in face of its problems by the vast deavage between the limits horizons, the short-run empiricism, the narrow petty individualism of the masses, and the historic needs of society. Administratively, this conflict results in a paralysis of leadership (of the executive) which loses its capacity for action when met by the unsocial, irresponsible, short-sighted demands of that mass-dominated institution, the legislature. Examples of this behavior in the US would presumably include the continuing public opposition to Universal Military Training, to high taxes, to “police actions,” and, most notoriously for Lippmann, the opposition to US entry into World War II.
Principles, not petty individual needs must govern political decisions. Which principles? Those in the objective public interest; i.e., those principles which “men would choose if they saw clearly, thought rationally, and acted disinterestedly and benevolently.” (By definition, any substantial conflict of interest is quite impossible.) This is the Public Philosophy. But for Lippmann the vast majority of men are manifestly incapable of meeting the demands for objectivity and selflessness implicit in such a system. “In a literal sense, the principles of the good society must be unpopular until they have prevailed sufficiently to alter the popular impulse.” Hence the contradiction.
In times of peace and stability, traditional democracy may stagger on; in periods of crisis, the conflict of public vs. short-run individual need can well have fatal consequences. In fact, crises, when resolved are normally resolved by, the action of a minority, says Lippmann, pointing to the fact that the Constitution was adopted, in an atmosphere of social crisis, by a small minority. Plainly, the enfeebled executive of a democratic society can only perform its function if it is freed from the debilitating embrace of the popular hydra.
Indeed, in the last analysis, if the enlightened minority does not intervene to stem the crisis of executive impotence, we face the threat of fascism. For, to Lippmann, fascism is the response of the masses, who, disgusted with parliamentary debility, and preferring effective government to the indecision and frailty of a representative system, choose vital dictatorship in a crisis.
Lippmann’s resolution for the problem will, by now, hardly come as any surprise. It is nothing less than constitutional dictatorship, euphemistically labeled State Constitutionalism. The electors should choose the executive, bait once chosen he must be free of them and subject only to the office (much, says Lippmann, as were the Popes and Kings, in principle).
In real life in the France of today where the crisis, in Lippmann’s terms, is most evident, precisely this solution has already been proposed. We know it as DeGaullism.
But to what are we to attribute the social irresponsibility of the masses and the venality of the legislature? Asks Lippmann. Not to “some vicious mole of nature in them,” but rather to the utopian demands and expectations of this same mass – its belief in the perfectibility of man, in the emancipation of man through the dissolution of class society, and in its rejection of the defeatism implicit in the modern philosopher’s La Condition Humaine. To this dominant theme of the modern mass movement, encompassing the revolutionary ideology of all from Robespierre to Lenin, Lippmann gives the generic name “Jacobinism.”
Torn by anomy and the atomization of life, now physical as well as spiritual in face of the impotence of the contemporary state, the struggle of modern man to right himself must end in either of two equally disastrous courses, Jacobinism or fascism. To prevent these utopian efforts at reconstruction, the enlightened minority, in the name of the Public Philosophy, must assume the reins of power.
In the subsequent attempt to spell out the concrete meaning of this Public Philosophy, there emerges an unabashed rehash of Catholic political theory – natural law, the feudal-Catholic conception of duties paralleling the rights of property, the joint church-state responsibility for education, family, wealth distribution, etc. Leo XIII, Yves Simon, and Mortimer Adler are clearly the inspirers of Lippmann’s mature thought. (And Catholic reviewers have not disguised their jubilance on this score.)
The Public Philosophy can hardly be considered a vital book on its own merits. Its theoretical poverty and undisguised reactionary perspectives can, in themselves, be of little interest to the labor movement. Lippmann’s class bias is too evident. Denying any distinct objective, class interests in society, the unconcealable conflict is represented as one between the intelligent, realistic few, and the primitive selfish majority. The implacable hostility of the masses to war, he labels social irresponsibility – in face of the genuine social irresponsibility of the US ruling class in its H-bomb program.
Whatever importance the book may have stems from its symptomatic significance, as an indication of the loss of confidence and the consequent drift into totalitarian patterns of a serious, representative, conservative political.
As socialists, we have long been familiar with this development, so that, for example, we were not puzzled at the phenomenon of liberals providing the spearhead of the attack on the Bricker amendment, in the name of a strong executive and in protest against the encroachment by the legislature upon the prerogatives of the executive. We understand thoroughly their opportunism, their fear of the public, their lack of courage to espouse the “hard” unpopular measures that America’s ruling class requires to meet its goals. Abdication, of their responsibilities as representatives in favor of the President, is, for the liberals, certainly less risky than having to vote openly for more Korean adventures.
Lippimann understands and approves such “statesmanship.” At the same time he bemoans the massive popular disillusionment with parliamentary democracy (closing his eyes to the vital connection between these two phenomena). Yet his own book is a part of a capitulation to the very pattern he claims to deplore.
Toynbee and Schweitzer can speak, and have spoken, of the organic crisis of western civilization. But in the last analysis they are “just preachers,” and modern churchgoers are seldom really ill at ease at a Sunday sermon about Hell and Salvation. Lippmann, however, is a responsible practical political. His surrender of democratic perspectives at this time, his recognition of the depth of our crisis and its inherence in the internal relations of capitalist society, can only be understood as a reflection of the increasing sensitivity of the ruling class to the mounting danger to them at home; i.e., to the real dimensions of the crisis of our time.
 






On the basis of his study of the role of “statism” in the colonial countries, which appeared in the Fall 1954 issue of Fourth International, the author discusses some key problems of the Chinese revolution.



* * *
IN THE fall issue of Fourth International, I presented the view that, for organic economic and political reasons, the revolutions in Asia have given rise to a group of new, independent bourgeois states whose economies are essentially dominated by the state; that this was the only way in which the bourgeois task of primary capital accumulation could now be realized, due to the capital shortage, the need for a planned integrated development, and also because it provides the indispensable means for the most effective control and exploitation of the working class. A historical and statistical effort was made to demonstrate the essentially similar methods, programs and perspectives of these states.
 
The Chinese State
Despite the numerous admitted basic similarities between the Chinese revolution and regime, and that of other colonial countries in Asia, the claim of organic identity will appear unsupportable to many Marxists. It will be argued that the analysis ignores the supposedly revolutionary significance of the land reforms, the role of consciousness in politics (the history of the Communist Party as a supposedly working class party), the problem of the dynamics, the direction of the economy, and the significance of the political line-up of the regime internationally.
 
The Land Problem
At the risk of beating down a straw man, we must reject the significance of the land redistribution as a decisive criterion for designating the class character of the state. The spectacular character of land redistribution in China has obscured for many the fundamental class character of this ‘transformation. The political and social characterization of this movement is determined by its relation to the revolution in the city; land reform can be an anti-capitalist act only in conjunction with an effort to destroy urban capitalism. Short of that it remains a bourgeois-democratic act irrespective of its scale, intensity, or revolutionary manifestation. In the case of China, the land reform must be seen as a subordinate aspect of a system of industrial reorganization similar to that being experienced in an entire welter of under-developed areas. This is not to say that the agrarian revolution does not pose problems for us (the permanent revolution, the role of the peasantry) but the class character of resultant society should not be one of them.
This estimate of the land problem becomes even simpler to integrate when we recall that China is not the only country of this type, in this period, to undergo drastic land reform. Burma has experienced a reform that parallels the Chinese in every basic feature, even going them one better by actually nationalizing the land. However, in the present state of industry and agriculture, this is likely to remain a mere juridical difference. [1]
The entire unfortunate question, the fact that Marxists should be at all awed, or even slightly disoriented by the land distribution, derives from two misunderstandings.
Firstly, the mechanical application of Trotsky’s version of the theory of permanent revolution, converting it into the assumption that under no circumstances can the colonial bourgeoisie solve any or all of its democratic demands in this epoch. This vulgarization of his theory is simply inconsistent with the facts (Burma, Guatemala, Bolivia) and should die of this inconsistency alone. We shall return to the question of permanent revolution below.
Secondly, the ahistorical conception that land reform is an indispensable feature of the bourgeois-democratic revolution, without which the revolution cannot be said to have been substantially accomplished. Unfortunately all history cries out against this. What the bourgeois revolution does demand, as a minimum, is the destruction of landlord dominance of the state, and of feudal property relations. Neither of these requirements organically involves land distribution. Japan is a perfect example of the complete destruction of feudal property relations without any significant land distribution. The German and Italian bourgeoisie did not succeed in complete elimination of all feudal property forms until just shortly before World War I. The actual seizure of power by the bourgeoisie, however, often necessitates a political alliance, not always a voluntary one, with the peasantry whose price is land reform. But this form and content of bourgeois revolution, despite its classical character, is actually the exception and not the rule.
 
The Role of Consciousness
E. Germain, in his desperate effort to demonstrate the revolutionary character of the CP of China, has defined it as an essentially working class party, despite its composition (rural and urban petty-bourgeois), and despite its “opportunist and menshevik conception of struggle on the bloc of four classes, the construction of democratic capitalism, and the equality of labor-capital;” [2] i.e., despite its basically bourgeois ideology as well. His grounds are that in doctrine it is communist, and that it educates its cadres in the spirit of devotion to the USSR; thus the materialist conception of the class character of a party is replaced with one stroke by a wholly idealistic one (and in this case a purely Stalinist criterion).
There is really little that anyone can add, in criticism of this light-minded, anti-Marxist conception, to what Trotsky has already written about it in 1932, in anticipation. (Fourth International, Jan.-Feb., 1950.)
 
Trotsky’s Conceptions
“The fact that individual Communists are in the leadership of the present armies does not at all transform the social character of the armies, even if their Communist leaders bear a definite proletarian stamp ...”
“It is one thing when the Communist Party, firmly resting on the flower of the urban proletariat, strives, through the workers, to lead the peasant war. It is an altogether different thing when a few thousands or even tens of thousand’s of revolutionists assume the leadership of the peasant war, and are in reality Communists, or take that name without having serious support from the proletariat ...”
In Russia the proletariat was in power, the leadership in the hands of a strong and tempered party, and “the entire commanding staff of the centralized Red Army was in the hands of the workers. Notwithstanding all this, the peasant detachments, incomparably weaker than the Red Army, often came into conflict with it ...”
“... the revolutionary peasantry of China, in the person of its ruling stratum, seems to have appropriated to itself beforehand the political and moral capital which should by the nature of things belong to the Chinese workers. Isn’t it possible that things may turn out so that all this capital will be directed at a certain moment against the workers?”
The peasantry cannot follow an independent course; it must follow either urban class.
“The peasantry does not find the road to the proletariat easily ... The bridge between the peasantry and bourgeoisie is provided by the urban petty bourgeoisie, chiefly by the intellectuals, who commonly come forward under the banner of Socialism and even Communism ... Thus in China, the causes and grounds for conflict between the army, which is peasant in composition and petty-bourgeois in leadership, and the workers, not only are not eliminated but on the contrary all the circumstances are such as to greatly increase the possibility and even the inevitability of such conflicts; and in addition the chances of the proletariat are in advance far less favorable than was the case in Russia.” (My emphasis.)
In the event that the workers are led by Trotskyists, then the struggle for hegemony between peasant and worker, between Communist and Left-Oppositionist, “bears in itself an inner tendency toward transformation into a class struggle.”
Perhaps it would not be amiss here to call attention to the fact that the class composition and character of the dominant parties in the other revolutionary colonial regimes is also petty-bourgeois; i.e., not the direct representatives of the bourgeoisie. And indeed this peculiarity is not peculiar at all since it is almost the norm for the urban petty bourgeoisie to provide the spearhead, organizationally, as well as the most radical ideological face of the revolution. [3] The bourgeoisie itself often enters the revolution, or rather accepts it after other classes have destroyed the old order, or, to curb an irresistible movement (Russia, 1917).
Thus it was in China too. The regime of Chiang, incompetent, bankrupt, dominated by the feudal landlord class (according to Germain), and utterly incapable of dealing with the spreading peasant revolution, is replaced by that movement, led by the urban petty bourgeoisie mobilized in the CP. It was this landlord regime of Chiang – accustomed during 10 years of war to the need and indispensability of planned industrial development – anticipating the proletarian danger, and hoping to secure its own dominance in the future state by minimizing the strength of the Shanghai bourgeoisie, that nationalised industrial property in a last-ditch effort to save itself! Upon the seizure of power, the bourgeoisie gratefully entens the regime and the state, which it hopes will be better able to deal with the revolutionary peasantry and the dangerous, if repressed, proletariat.
 
The Direction of the Economy
It can be argued that though China and the others have many economic structural similarities, they are essentially different in terms of the direction of movement, and that therefore the coincidence of policy and forms is merely conjunctural.
It is in this role of the dynamics of the situation, that Germain and others seek supplementary support for his up-to-this-point idealistic conception of the CP as a working class party forced to move left. Let us therefore examine Germain’s dynamics.
For him, a state of dual power exists today in China, characterized by the fact that “economic power is still predominantly in the hands of the bourgeoisie.” As a result of international and internal crises, the regime will be forced to move left. This will be manifested economically by the “completion of the expropriation of the urban bourgeoisie.” But Germain has shown us that this “expropriation” is already 80% complete in heavy industry, and 30% in light industry. Furthermore, he himself believes that, as regards light industry and commerce in China, even “a dictatorship of the proletariat would have to be accompanied by a period of NEP, considerably broader and more protracted than in Russia, without the complete suppression of private property in the domain of small urban and village industry and commerce of the artisans, etc.” If this is so, then actually no qualitative change is possible in economic terms (as defined in terms of nationalization), and therefore one would suppose, by his criteria that the “economic power (would be) still predominantly in the hands of the bourgeoisie” even under a dictatorship1 of the proletariat; i.e. a move to the left from dual power is impossible by Germain’s criteria.
The source of this confusion, this internal contradiction on Germain’s part, lies in a long unresolved dilemma, and consists of repeating the same error he committed in his early provocative but disastrous discussion of the buffer zone in Europe. There he offered as one proof of the bourgeois character of these states, the fact that not more than 60% of industry was nationalized. Neither then nor now does the distinction between a bourgeois and a proletarian state rest upon such narrow quantitative distinctions as the exact proportion of statified industry. Once again, the abstraction of nationalized property has thrown him.
 
Problems of Capital Accumulation
But, false as it may be, Germain is not really interested an the theory of increased expropriation except as it provides him with an economic rationale for his idealistic conception of the CP. For the real qualitative change for Germain lies in a more limited goal, in the final elimination of the classical bourgeois elements from the state apparatus (and not from the economy, which we agree with Germain, is quite impossible), and the necessary turn of the CP toward the proletariat in this process.
And here once again the grossest idealism rears its head. For the main obstacle to the growth of the Chinese economy and the stabilisation of the regime, is neither the remaining private industry nor the pre-revolutionary elements in the bureaucracy, but rather the dangers stemming from the problem of capital accumulation and the inevitably “necessary” repressions of the proletariat and peasantry from whose hides this capital must come under present circumstances. The ideological commitments of the Chinese CP will no more interfere with this course than they did in limiting Stalin’s course toward the Russian proletariat. Once in power, the main enemy of the bureaucracy is always the masses whom it must exploit; with the impotent remnants of the classical bourgeoisie, it can do as it likes, or, at worst, can always come to some understanding with it, for the bourgeoisie recognizes perfectly well that only the CP stands between it and the workers. It is about the ensuing consequences of the efforts at capital accumulation that the next stages in the development of the Chinese revolution will take place, and not about the subordinate problem of classical bourgeois residues! It is of course axiomatic that a workers state in China would organize a major part even of its industrial perspective around the pursuit of a genuinely internationalist policy. But naturally, this is quite alien to the spirit of the present Chinese regime.
In brief therefore, the dynamics of the Chinese economy are toward increasing state dominance in heavy industry and growing role in light industry as well. This process does not involve any qualitative change in the class character of the regime. And this is no different from the tendency in the other countries we have discussed: Formosa, Burma, India, Indonesia. Variations of degree and tempo doubtless exist. But the all-important method and process remain parallel.
 
The Association of China With the USSR
The intimate alliance of one state with another, granting for the moment its working-class character, would certainly be a significant criterion for the consideration of the nature of the regime, if there were any indication that the act was an expression of proletarian internationalism. Unfortunately, only the grossest misconception of the policy of the Chinese CP could conceive of its alliance with the USSR as subordination to internationalism or even to the Kremlin. The policies of the Chinese CP on the contrary are essentially independent of Russian interests or of those of the world working class, and reflect only the needs and interests of collective Chinese capital. That these interests should, in the immediate conjuncture of events seem to lie in alliance with the USSR is easily determined by the recent history of China – the fact that the US was and remains the threatening colonial master. Just as in Yugoslavia, the needs of China, as interpreted and comprehended by the narrow, national, empiricist bureaucrats of the CP, come first, and, if the US would allow it (no longer likely) a change in policy of the CP would be only too likely. [4]
 
The Permanent Revolution
The theory of the permanent revolution is rightly regarded one of the cornerstones of modern Marxist theory. Before World War II, this conception had demonstrated its vitality, in all its nuances – in the events of the Russian Revolution and throughout the inter-war period – providing the movement with a series of predictions and analyses repeatedly, brilliantly, confirmed by events.
But it must be equally clear that the colonial revolutions of the past decade have proceeded along a pattern of development quite unforseen by us – that the emergence of a new group of bourgeois states in Asia is inconsistent with our expectations derived from the theory of permanent revolution. We cannot but recognize the existence of a new bourgeois state in India (and elsewhere) despite the irresolution on the land question (fatal as that may prove, it is only one source of organic disequilibrium). To attempt to solve the theoretical problem this poses by the notion that India is not “really independent” would seem to be the most dangerous scholasticism. Yet, so long as the problem of the place of these states in history and in theory has not been -resolved, there will always remain some, who, seeking the simplest resolution, will maintain that nothing has changed; i.e., the former colonies are not independent states but disguised satellites and tributaries. And since a closely related view even finds some reflection in Germain, we must touch upon it briefly.
This conception rests on the “fact” that the bourgeois democratic demands have not been completely realized in these new states. As in Russia, the bourgeoisie is proved incapable of creating a truly independent national State, resolving its historic tasks; and the next point on the agenda therefore remains a proletarian resolution of the democratic demands. In this way, Trotsky’s theory is kept intact.
 
Unhistorical Conception
Unfortunately, this conception of an absolute minimum of democratic bourgeois demands is completely unhistorical. The nature of the demands, the minimum consistent with, and indispensable to the creation of bourgeois rule, will obviously vary considerably with the manner in which the bourgeoisie comes to power, its history, and the epoch in which it enters upon its tasks. Certainly, concrete bourgeois world history supplies ample evidence of this. It is impermissible to refuse to distinguish between an imperfectly resolved (i.e., non-classical) revolution, and a revolution that is unresolved, between form and essence. The qualitative transformation to a new bourgeois state can be achieved without radical land reform, in spite of secondary territorial incompleteness, and remnants of outmoded social and economic classes, and certainly without (the appurtenances of the parliamentary state.
But if these new states are a fact, is this development as crucial a test of the validity of the theory of the permanent revolution as it appears? Does it strike at the letter or the spirit of the theory? To this end, a closer look at what the theory really says is necessary.
In his address to the general council of the German Workingmen’s Association where the theory of permanent revolution is first propounded, Marx expresses the view that once a revolutionary situation has developed, the proletariat must pursue its own aims under its own independent organization, even when engaged in a common struggle alongside the bourgeoisie. Once the process is under way, the perspective is opened for the proletariat to carry the revolution beyond its bourgeois goals – the revolution in permanence. The key conception and interest is not that the bourgeoisie would or would not fear to enter the revolutionary path, but that once begun, the door was open to the possibility of combined development – that an independently organized and motivated working class need not, should not, and would not stop short of workers’ power.
Starting from this conception, Trotsky refined it to fit the epoch of capitalist decay. Introducing, with Lenin, the notion that the bourgeoisie no longer dared carry through its own revolution, and that the task would have to be executed by the working class, Trotsky added the conception that the proletariat would not stop at this point, but would proceed to the workers state.
 
Heart of the Theory
The real heart of the theory is that once involved as a class, the workers cannot stop short of full power. The conception that only the workers can carry through the bourgeois revolution is not the key to the theory of permanent revolution, for Lenin’s policy too was based on the impotence of the bourgeoisie, while rejecting the theory of permanent revolution. In the concrete historical circumstances in which Marx’s theory of permanent revolution was restored and reshaped to the needs of the times, it is only natural that what was essentially a historical aspect of the theory (the impotence of the bourgeoisie) should have appeared as one of its major postulates. For the really original element in Trotsky’s conception of the permanent revolution, the aspect that makes it his, is that if the workers participate in the bourgeois revolution as a class (i.e., unlike the major aspects of their participation in the French and English revolutions), then the colonial areas too can be ripe for the direct transition to a workers state. Furthermore, due to the peculiar development of their economies, and the world situation of capital, the backwardness of the economy and the small size of the proletariat will not interfere with this perspective of combined development. (Even Lenin had only envisaged the task of the democratic dictatorship of the proletariat and peasantry to be the creation of a bourgeois state.) But always the unspoken premise (very explicit in Marx) – the presence of a revolutionary party which understands the need for independent class organization, action, and goals.
It is the overwhelming revolutionary pressure, in the absence of this indispensable catalyst, that permitted and forced the bourgeois classes, native and foreign, to accept the developing revolution, to tolerate it before attempting to housebreak it and direct it into channels of new bourgeois states.
Seen from this perspective and conception of the theory of permanent revolution, the fact that for an interlude, the bourgeoisie is able to establish its rule is a matter of distinctly secondary theoretical importance, though of course, of the greatest historical significance. But more important, it permits the unimpeded perspective of revolutionary working-class notion; i.e., the retention of the theory of permanent revolution.
A revolution is not identical with its first phase. The distance between February and October is not always eight mtonths. The French revolution took four years to reach its peak, and the English revolution even longer. On the morning of its assumption of power, the new ruling class must discover that the immediate problems of society, of the revolution, are beyond its capacities, and in its first acts, it lays the basis for the next stase of the revolution, the necessary intervention of the proletariat, in its own name!
There is of course another way out of the difficulty posed by the problem of the new bourgeois states. That is, to argue that the new states are indications of a new force in the political arena, a bureaucracy able to revolutionize society with or without the proletariat.
 
Pablo and the Permanent Revolution
As if to remove this alternative from the realm of speculation, a resolution reproduced in the Fourth International, July-August 1952, indicates that it is precisely this road that Germain and Pablo propose to follow (thus far, only for China).
Germain’s work is undoubtedly a brilliant tour de force. However, the elegant style cannot conceal the confused, opportunistic character of his politics. We have argued previously that Germain had to develop an idealistic conception of the character of the Chinese CP, and of the future course of development of Chinese economy. We now come to the core of his reasoning on these issues.
In this thesis, Germain attempts to interpret the history of the Chinese revolution, as well as its perspectives, in such a manner as to conform in almost every respect to the classical pattern envisaged in the pure theory of permanent revolution. One slight detail is missing – for the revolutionary role of the proletariat, Germain substitutes the revolutionary role of the CP bureaucracy.
The theory in brief is as follows: The bourgeois-democratic tasks have not been fully realized in China up to this point. The process of full realization will here, classically, involve the transition to a workers state. In this transition, the history and character of the CP leadership indicate that it will be able to consummate the final revolution.
Spacious as they may be, Germain actually sees in the secondary aspects of incompleted bourgeois tasks, the major forces compelling the revolution in permanence! If this issue is really so crucial to Germain, and if his case really rests upon such shaky foundations, it is necessary to take a closer look at it.
Since Germain prides himself on not being a sectarian, a purist in his demands upon revolutionary movements, he must maintain, if he is to be taken seriously, that these areas of incompleteness are of such magnitude that they vitiate, or at least severely cripple the unquestionable partial achievements of the bourgeois revolution up to this date. An examination of his five measures of irresolution of the bourgeois-democratic demands will dispel any such misconception.
 
Germain’s Five Indices


All foreign capital is not yet expropriated. How absurd, as a vital criterion, this objection becomes, when it is clearly incontestable that the decisive voice in China today (for the first time in 100 years) lies not with foreign capital but native.
 
Incomplete nationa1 unity (Hong Kong, Formosa, the Russian enclaves and Russian influence in Sinkiang). With the exception of “Russian” Sinkiang, are these really more than the fringes of the national state? How innumerable is the list of just such imperfections, today, in unquestionably bourgeois lands.
 
The incomplete agrarian reform, by which Germain means the existence and constant recreation of rich peasants. But how this is an indication of incomplete bourgeois land reform, (one of whose laws is precisely the tendency toward capital accumulation on the land, and land concentration) is somewhat obscure.
 
“In the domain of the state the symbiosis between bourgeois property and the bureaucratic tendencies of the CP apparatus represents a powerful obstacle to a genuine democratic upheaval.” Naturally. But isn’t that an organic phase at the close of every bourgeois revolution – the attempt to consolidate the ruling classes against the masses, who threaten to get out of bounds after the first days of the revolution; i.e., wbo instinctively search for the permanent revolution? Indeed, if anything, this symbiotic process is indicative of the relntive completion of the revolution, and not of its partial character.
 
The imperialist menace to China through armies in Korea, Viet-Nam, Burma, Formosa, Japan. This is certainly the crudest example of how desperately Germain must search to substantiate his fantasy that none of the tasks of the Chinese (bourgeois) Revolution has yet been definitely resolved.”


Only by the most desperate determination to fit the situation to one’s formula could Germain construe the real content of his five indices as more than secondary qualifications to an essentially completed resolution of the bourgeois tasks. Does there exist a strong national state, free of imperialist domination, able and willing to organize society about the goal of capitalist society, the accumulation of capital? To the degree that this pursuit is possible under bourgeois conditions today, this situation has definitely been achieved, above all, in China.
But, deprived of this unhistoric fantasy of the incomplete bourgeois revolution what basis for revolutionary perspective is left to Germain? Does it pose a serious problem for Pablo? Unfortunately, Pablo is hardly likely to pay much attention. For, as is so often the case, many of his rank-and-file disciples, unable, or too careless, to follow the sophisticated rationalizations of Germain (and, perhaps, also a bit more “flexible,” more rashly prepared to drop all Marxist analysis for impressionistic empiricism) have already been calling China a “workers state” for quite some time. And indeed, why not? There is nothing in Germain’s analysis or method that prevents their doing so. The only distindtion left to Germain between the present regime and a workers state is the problem of democratic workers committees. But this “anachronistic” prerequisite has long since been abandoned by Germain and Pablo in their analyses of other situation’s, so why not here?
 
New Line Emerges
Fortunately, the history of Pabloite development should make the reason for Germain’s hesitancy, his lag, apparent. As in all transitional statements, even in cases of the greatest personal integrity, it is inevitable that we shall find the emerging new line cloaked in the traditional framework, which it is really trying to destroy. The old and the new, side by side, reveal the all-decisive direction of thinking. Viewed in the context of the entire recent evolution of ideas in Pablo, it is evident that the new element in the analysis, the role of the bureaucracy, provides the real line, land not the lip service to revolutionary perspectives.
If History pays any attention to their theory at all, it will be to note the irony of a situation, in which the theory of permanent revolution was used by Germain to explain the absence (past and future) of the primary role of the proletariat, and to rationalise the revolutionary role of the bireaucracy in the creation of a new “workers state” – how in this moment of transition, for the Pabloite; the revolutionary essence of the theory was destroyed to preserve the mask of orthodoxy.
 
Problems and Perspectives
A Marxist view of the permanent revolution requires the clearest distinction between the incidental and the essential. Trotsky’s theory must be cleared of the historic specific element in order to preserve its genuine contribution to revolutionary theory. We need the candid recognition of the fact of these state-capitalist bourgeois states, and the theoretical understanding of this development. We must be prepared to endure Germain’s list of one, and twenty erudite reasons why these revolutions are incomplete. Nevertheless, the bourgeois-democratic demands can no longer provide the central focus here of our program or perspectives. Only in this way can we avoid the pitfall of surrender to the bureaucracy as the harbinger of revolution – and preserve a clear working-class perspective.
As was indicated above, one of the chief driving forces in the revolutionary developments in Asia was the deepening economic crisis, manifesting itself in a drastic; decline in the standard of living, and this at a time when the demand had risen for a better way of life, improvement not stagnation. The end of direct imperialist rule therefore meant to the masses an end also to the shackles impeding growth. An independent but stagnant economy would be intolerable.
Under these circumstances, the question is, can the new regimes reverse the trend of decades; can they meet the basic problems of production and consumption?
 
Rate of Capital Accumulation
Colin Clark, the most noted authority on world income and production statistics, is of the opinion that the rate of capital accumulation in Asia today (1953) is not even up to the pre-war rate, and that the most likely course for these economies is absolute stagnation, and a growing disparity between their development and that of even contemporary western economy. [5] By and large the available figures bear out this thesis.
For India, where information is relatively abundant, planned capital development is not much greater than the pre-war period. When one considers the likelihood that the plan will be under-realized, then a planned increase in investment, a mere 25% above the depressed pre-war years is not a happy omen.
In Clark’s view, instead of the approximately 4% of national income currently devoted to capital accumulation, a rate of 12.5% would be necessary to absorb the annual population increment and maintain even the pre-war rate of growth (UN, Statistics of National Income and Expenditures).
Under existing plans it is conceivable that food consumption could be returned to its depressed pre-war level (the plan’s maximum goal), but little else is to be expected. Without great industrial development, concealed unemployment in agriculture must continue to rise, production per man to fall, and the vital reorganization of the tiny-scale agriculture can not be attempted; i.e., the crisis is unresolved.
With all due historical variants, the situation is essentially similar in the other countries under discussion.
In Burma, despite a redistribution of the investment pattern increasing the share of the government, investment remains the same as 1938 – 12% of national income. However the prolonged civil war has cut that income to two-thirds its 1938 level; apart from rice mills, the income from industry and “mines is only one-third that of 1938. [6]
Indonesia’s greatly depressed state is especially bitter in view of the fact that the 1930s witnessed an enormous rate of industrial development, whose dimensions are best indicated by the fact that employment in modern-type factories tripled in the decade. [7]
From the little information available, it seems that between the unrepressed peasant war, the inflation, and the ‘’strike-happy” working-class, the government is just barely able to hold on, and cannot even restore the pre-war level of output, much less organize capital investment on any significant scale.
The fact that to this day, elections have not been held in Indonesia (an appointed parliament rules) should be a sufficient index of the depth of the current crisis.
Regarding China, insufficient information is available to permit a comparison of economic growth over the different periods of the past 20 years. But despite Pablo’s confidence, there are no indications as yet that the Chinese have or will succeed where the Indians have failed. A meager indication of the prospects can be gleaned when one considers that the Sino-Soviet pact grants China a loan of just $50 million annually, barely half of the US Government loans and grants to India, not to speak of several private projects of considerable magnitude.
 
Effect of the Class Struggle
Above all of course, it is the class struggle in city and farm which provides the insuperable obstacle to the requisite accumulation. Not a rising but a falling standard of living is required for significant capital growth. At the moment the worker is still able to assert somewhat his demand for improved hours and conditions of work. The victory of the revolution against imperialism is translated by the workers from the first into a victory against capital (synonymous with imperialism), yielding an era of legitimized new expectations and demands. But despite the workers’ resistance, the facts of the situation are becoming manifest. In India, consumer goods output per capita falls while output of producer goods rises. On this score there can be no relaxation.
The political consequences are equally inevitable – proletarian revolution or the imposition of the naked non-parliamentary rule of capital in a last convulsive effort to perform its outdated historic mission. The polarization which proceeds this decision is already far advanced in Indonesia. Hence the markedly rebellious workers who, with some legitimacy, are held responsible by the government and the bourgeoisie for the dearth of capital investment and the failure of production to reach its pre-war level. Hence the pressing demands of the Chinese workers (and their hasty repression) when the agrarian revolution conquered. Here we see the permanent revolution in action, in its incipient stages.
 
The Problem of Land Distribution
If the class situation in the cities poses organic obstacles to capital development, this is no less the case with the problem of land distribution.
In a situation of concentrated land ownership, where the landed class is not feudal, and does not use its power to obstruct industrial development, the fact of concentrated ownership can be a great support to the process of capital accumulation. Even in China, for example, considerable capital was provided by Chinese landlords. In Kiangsu, 7.5% of the large landholders owned small factories (handicraft), and 3.2% were shareholders in large (modern) plants. (Chen Han-sheng. The Present Agrarian Problem.) Once this mediating, expropriating class is removed, sums that formerly might have gone into capital accumulation are more likely to be diverted to consumption goods (this is particularly true in backward areas), a tendency that is likely to accentuate enormously the difficulties of an economy trying to accumulate and able to produce few consumer goods. Under such circumstances the initial gains of land distribution are often dissipated when the government attempts to meet the situation by directly “relieving” the agriculturalist of his new unspent surplus (taxation, forced sales, etc.) in order to convert it into capital.
In any case, distributed or not, the problem of accelerating primitive accumulation means unceasing unrest in the villages. Nor does distribution by itself countermand the low productivity, which is essentially a function of small-scale operation, backward techniques, and surplus labor.
The fearful economic backwardness, the decay of western capitalism, the irrepressible revolutionary movement, and the absence of the revolutionary party, have combined in our epoch to present us with examples in Asia (and elsewhere) of the theoretically ultimate stage of capitalist development. (There is of course no reason to believe that this theoretical possibility will be realized as a qualitatively changed structure of western capitalist society, short of a tremendous proletarian defeat.) But even this rationalized expression of capital is both theoretically and empirically quite incapable of resolving the problems that called it into being. Nowhere has this spasmodic effort resulted in any stabilization; everywhere, from its very first entry upon the scene of power, it runs headlong into the most implacable class war, and is capable of mere survival only to the degree that the crisis of leadership remains, as the final missing link in the transformation of humanity. For it is only through the utilization and increase, by and under aegis of the working class, of the resources of the entire world that the problem can begin to be met.

Footnotes
1. Nationalization of land, in and of itself, is of course no more progressive (than nationalization of industrial property. It simply paves the way in backward areas of small-scale agriculture for the development of industrial agriculture when that development must take place rapidly and at a forced pace just as is the case in industry. In the US, the reorganization of land tenure for our industrial agriculture simply uses more subtle, slower means. Burma has already allocated funds for the establishment of exploratory collective farms for industrial agriculture.
2. Fourth International, Dec. 1950, p.115.
3. In almost none of these new colonial regimes is political power likely to be turned over to the bourgeoisie directly. One of the important elements supporting this development is the new weight assumed in these states and economies by the petty bourgeoisie (administrators, professionals, the new vastly expanded state bureaucracy). The organization, of society on these lines creates a new role for the petty-bourgeois. His future lies not in classical bourgeois independent economic activity, but rather in his role, his place in the state apparatus. The state is the source of all perspective, of economic growth, “necessary” repression, and above all, jobs.
4. That China was at least partially pushed into the Russian alliance, despite its wish to pursue a policy similar to that of the other Asiatic states, was noted by James P. Cannon in 1953:
“And one bright day, the world was suddenly confronted by a new China, which was really independent, but backward in its industrial development and eager to get foreign loans and credit. The government of Mao Tse-tung offered to guarantee the capitalist system of production, and to guarantee all loans, on that basis.
“The statesmen and leaders of British capitalism, who are older, wiser and more experienced in world affairs wanted to come to terms with the new reality, to recognize the new revolutionary government and continue trading with the new China.
“But the American statesmen and leaders wouldn’t have it that way. They can’t understand how it happened. They feel that somebody gypped them, and they are as indignant as a farmer who has been played for a sucker in a carnival shell game. China, according to their thinking, ‘belongs’ to them, and somehow or other, by some trick or other, they ‘lost’ it.”
5. C. Clark. Manchester Guardian Weekly, Jan. 29, 1953.
6. Economic Bulletin for Asia & Far East, Vol.III No.1-2.
7. Labor Problems in S.E. Asia.
 

